# Chapter 1

Dhamma Moon
w h e n, m u f f l e d a s a  b r o k e n g o n g,
yo u  d o n’t  r e v e r b e r at e,
yo u ’v e r e ac h e d n i b b ā n a:
r e c r i m i n at i o n’s  t u r m o i l f i n a l ly s t i l l e d i n yo u .
Dhammapada 134







w h e n, m u f f l e d a s a  b r o k e n g o n g,
yo u  d o n’t  r e v e r b e r at e,
yo u ’v e r e ac h e d n i b b ā n a:
r e c r i m i n at i o n’s  t u r m o i l f i n a l ly s t i l l e d i n yo u .
Dhammapada 134



FOR AJAHN SUCITTO
AND THE SANGHA
OF
WAT PAH CITTAVIVEKA
(CHITHURST BUDDHIST MONASTERY)



EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 10
AUTHOR’S PREFACE 25
 1 THE LANGUAGE CONUNDRUM 38
 2 A DIALECTICAL FREE-FOR-ALL 63
 3 THE MENACE OF ART 107
 4 THE FORCE OF IMAGERY 133
 5 ALLEGORY AND PARABLE 159
 6 FIGURES IN THE LANDSCAPE 201
 7 VERNACULAR HUMOUR 246
 8 FOLKLORE 282
 9 MORAL ITINERARIES 314
 10 A DIALOGUE ON SELFLESSNESS 340
 11 A DIALOGUE ON THE AFTERLIFE 368
 12 TEMPORAL POWERS 400
EPILOGUE 425
BIBLIOGRAPHY 450
GLOSSARY OF PALI TERMS 454
GUIDE TO PRONUNCIATION 458
EDITOR’S NOTES 460
NOTES 463

BY AJAHN SUCITTO
HOW THIS BOOK CAME TO BE
The figure seated in the chair at the back of the Shrine 
Room was instantly recognizable, even though I hadn’t 
seen him for thirty years. Tall, lanky, straight-backed 
as the chair; angular face capped by a mat of grey hair, 
and composed as attentively as if musing on some turn 
of phrase in a Henry James novel: Harold Beaver, my 
personal tutor and teacher of English and American 
Literature at the University of Warwick. That would 
have been 1968-71. Now it was 2001, Cittaviveka 
Buddhist Monastery, West Sussex; I was the abbot 
and he was the guest. A swapping of roles, but the 
immediacy of contact and informal warmth were much 
the same. The reminiscences were minimal; he was 
more interested in the present: he was in the midst 
of writing a book, something to do with the Buddha. 
He had enjoyed Warwick, but during his time at his 
next post, the University of Amsterdam, saw signs 
that the free-thinking attitudes of the sixties and

11
HAROLD BEAVER
seventies were coming to an end, at least in academic 
circles. In his opinion, universities, on account of their 
need for corporate sponsorship, were now directing 
intelligence to the needs of the market rather than 
freely exploring and broadening the scope of the 
human mind. Hence Buddhism, and more specifically 
the Buddha, the epitome of the awakened mind, had 
caught his attention.
Following up on that, he had moved to northern 
Thailand and spent several weeks as a guest at Wat Pah 
Pong – the monastery founded by Ajahn Chah from 
which some 300 branches had subsequently sprung, 
Cittaviveka being one. This monastery had been my 
base on and off since 1979; and I had also contributed 
to a collection of talks and articles published in a 
book called Seeing the Way – which also included the 
biographies and photos of the contributors. Hence the 
link: Harold had seen the book, glanced through the 
biographies and, noting that I was credited as studying 
English and American Literature during his time at 
Warwick, made the connections. 
And now here he was, fluent and purposeful as 
ever, and bearing a manuscript; it was a book that he 
was bringing to its concluding draft, and it was on the 
Buddha’s use of language. Or the Buddha seen through 
the eyes of Harold Beaver: as a recluse who was also a 
master of language. Well, the Buddha as a figure takes 
on many forms, often dependent on who portrays him 
and why, but this was a new angle. Harold wondered 
if I would like to take a look at the manuscript and

12
THE BROKEN GONG
offer any comments. How sweet: to comment on 
and correct the essay of my teacher! But of course. 
The sense of personal gratitude was immediate: 
at this formative time in my life, Harold had been an
inspiration. My earlier schooling had proceeded from 
the premise that the purpose of education was to get 
a good job. But his insistence as a teacher was that 
education was for the development of the mind; and 
that literature contained truths and models that we 
would do well to understand – not just in the halls of 
universities, but in the reality of human life. He was 
ready and available to dialogue at any time, and one 
never left the conversation stranded in some theoretical 
dead-end, or unaffected by his enthusiasm. This man 
could read a text like no one I had ever known: tease 
subtleties and characterisation out of lines of Homer, 
probe beneath the text of Moby Dick into its homosexual 
undertones, and delight in the movement of thought 
in Wallace Stevens’ lyrics. All that was behind me now, 
but to read what Harold had made out of the 2,500- 
year-old texts of the Buddhist Pali Canon – which for 
the most part came across as rather dry and repetitive 
and enlivened only by bizarre cosmological touches 
from a long-gone world-view – that would surely be an 
eye-opener.
This is the book, The Broken Gong. Or more accurately, 
it is the book that resulted after Harold had digested 
my comments and editorial tweaking. I had found 
it an easy and even compelling read; I quickly added 
some notes and excised a few sentences, and passed it

13
HAROLD BEAVER
back to him. He left a day or two later and wrote to me 
from Utrecht. In terms of age, he was just passing year 
seventy, but was itinerant and looking to settle down. I 
offered to look out for properties near the monastery; 
we exchanged a few letters. 
The next spring I was teaching in the USA, but 
returned to Cittaviveka at the end of April. It was early 
in June that I got the phone call: it was from Harold’s 
son, Jake. Harold had suddenly died of a heart attack 
in a hotel near King’s Cross station in London. Could 
we arrange a memorial of some kind? Of course; we’d 
scatter Harold’s ashes around a memorial stupa in 
the monastery’s grounds. Then when Jake came for 
a visit, The Broken Gong, dedicated to the monastery 
and myself, came with him – in a cardboard box that 
also contained a rejection sheet from the Oxford 
University Press. OUP had also thoughtfully attached a 
list of errors and quibbles, and Harold had noted these 
and included corrections in the current manuscript. 
Among these pencilled notes were a few marked ‘ASK 
SUCITTO’; but the occasion hadn’t occurred. Anyway, 
Jake handed me the manuscript and The Broken Gong 
was now in my hands. I made a copy and passed it 
around and discovered that among the monastics at 
least, the work was well-received, and considered 
worthy of publishing. 
Twelve years passed, during which time I was 
engrossed in being abbot and teacher and (too) busy; 
but that came to an end in 2014 when I resigned 
and took a year’s sabbatical for a personal retreat. I

14
THE BROKEN GONG
returned to sort through various boxes of papers, and 
thus unearthed The Broken Gong. It was very evidently 
under my wing. And now I had time to tidy up the 
manuscript and render it publishable.
If you’ve retired, you probably know the number 
of things that can present themselves as being long 
overdue for attention. Proofreading is probably not one 
of them. However, the book and I were both fortunate 
that one of my students, Dongshil Kim, offered her 
services. She groomed the text into a format that 
another volunteer, Lisa Gorecki, could check; another 
supporter, Nicholas Halliday, offered typesetting and 
design. I corrected small details – such as the spelling, 
the Pali and the endnotes – and added a footnote where 
points or translations seemed to need it. Otherwise, 
despite occasionally sighing over the Greek and the 
Latin – ‘Harold, people aren’t familiar with these 
languages these days!’ – I’ve let the text stand as Harold 
left it. I think its vigour will carry you along and offer 
inspiration – as well as an encouragement to closely 
examine what the Buddha meant to convey through 
what he said, how he said it, and what he left unsaid.
THE AUTHOR
But first, having read the obituaries – I knew him only 
through those three years at Warwick – I’ll introduce 
the author more formally.

15
HAROLD BEAVER
Harold Beaver was born Helmut Lothar Bibergeil at 
Dessau in Germany on June 27, 1929. Being of Jewish 
extraction, the family fled to Britain in 1938, where he 
acquired an Anglicised name and an English education 
that culminated in his reading Classics at St John’s 
College, Oxford. He subsequently worked for the 
Oxford University Press for seven years, wrote a couple 
of novels and taught in Kenya at a Quaker school. 
He returned to England in 1965, and in 1968 began 
teaching English and American Literature at Warwick, 
where he stayed until 1982. During that period, he 
produced editions of works by Edgar Allan Poe and 
Herman Melville, before moving on to the chair of 
American Literature at the University of Amsterdam. 
His academic career subsequently drew to an end at 
the University of Denver – after which his interest in 
Buddhism took him to Thailand. 
His obituary in The Times describes him as an 
‘academic rebel who challenged conventional thinking 
with unorthodox theories’ and refers to how ‘the 
sheer breadth of his intellectual interests made him 
appear to many a charismatic figure. To others, this 
chameleon quality suggested a lack of concentration.’ 
The obituary concludes: ‘Certainly he could not be 
called a systematic thinker, but he was a remarkably 
acute reader and a learned commentator who did much 
to promote the study of American literature in Britain.’
Although Harold did ask for my opinions on his 
manuscript, we didn’t discuss its overview; and at the 
time of his death, I hadn’t received the questions that

16
THE BROKEN GONG
he intended to put to me. Despite the absence of a fuller 
conversation with him, I shall add a few notes to give 
the reader some perspective on aspects of the text, 
as well as to indicate how I understand the scope and 
intentions of The Broken Gong.
THE APPROACH OF
THE BROKEN GONG
It’s notable that the academic Harold Beaver travelled 
to northeast Thailand, home of the earthy Forest 
monastic tradition, perhaps to get Buddhism under 
his skin. This gives us a hint of what occasioned The 
Broken Gong. It issues from a scholar’s mind, but one 
that seeks to draw daily life in all its colours from the 
hallowed texts. Consequently, the book risks a loss in 
literal accuracy for the sake of an emphatically live 
presentation of the Buddha and his teachings within 
the culture of his age. By means of a focus on the 
minutiae that occupy the backdrop of the discourses, 
it probes beneath the texts to offer a vivid portrayal 
of the people, mores and landscape of ancient India. 
Particularly of the people. Beaver sketches characters 
through attending to their use of words, their social 
standing, and the way they handled dialogue (especially 
tricky exchanges such as those between a prince or 
king and a revered sage). Overall, Beaver’s intent is to 
depict characters who appear as mouthpieces in the 
texts as three-dimensional flesh-and-blood humans.

17
HAROLD BEAVER
Towards this end, Beaver translates the Pali texts 
into a contemporary English that is vernacular and 
colloquial. Yet he also widens his focus to place 
the Buddha in the context of world culture: most 
specifically the Classical and Western literary traditions 
that were Harold’s purview. And with that comes a 
qualifier: Beaver doesn’t allude to classical Indian 
sacred literature such as the Upanishads or the Vedas. 
This would be a serious flaw if The Broken Gong were 
meant to offer a contextual elucidation of the Buddha’s 
teachings. However, it doesn’t attempt that. Instead, 
the book focuses on irony, imagery, verbal play and 
debating prowess; this is because the very handling of 
words, as well as the words themselves, are in Beaver’s 
opinion crucial to the Buddha’s way of expressing the 
teachings. In fact, the underlying theme of The Broken 
Gong is the Buddha’s use of language, since ‘the implicit 
nature of language … is prone to mislead.’ According 
to Beaver, ‘the ultimate paradox of Buddhism, then, is 
its need to employ language to counter language.’ This 
point is argued in Chapter 1, and runs through the book 
and into the Epilogue, a revision of a previously-written 
essay that he used to form The Broken Gong’s conclusion. 
THE FIGURE OF THE BUDDHA
Understanding that any portrayal of a human being is a 
fiction, and given the slippery nature of words, Beaver 
prefaces his book with the comment that ‘The Buddha

18
THE BROKEN GONG
of the suttas, like King Ajātasattu or Prince Pāyāsi, must 
ultimately be read as a character in fiction.’ His attempt 
is then ‘Not so much a life of the Buddha, but a character 
sketch’ by means of ‘a rather secular, humanist effort 
to discover the voice and personality of Gotama in his 
own dialogues and discourses.’ Beaver’s verbal portrait 
of the Buddha then conforms to Picasso’s dictum: ‘Art 
is a lie that tells the truth.’ And religious art is the most 
tricky of all lies, because it configures divine or ideal 
truths. So, just as the Renaissance depictions of Mary 
and Jesus – their Semitic skin bleached white, and 
clothed in Classical drapes – are a product of Catholic 
Europe, so the portrayals of the Buddha resonate 
with the projections of their age: there are the almost 
expressionless statues that present an imperturbable 
transcendence, the disembodied presence of the 
Mahayana sutras that incline to the realm of the Ideal, 
or the socially-attuned Victorian sage of The Light of 
Asia. The Broken Gong offers a fiction to place beside all 
these, but it is of a dynamic and expressive man, skilled 
in leadership, diplomacy and the mysteries of language. 
Does it work? We may be pleasantly surprised by 
Beaver’s reference to the Buddha’s ‘light-hearted, 
humorous quality’, yet acknowledge how it not only 
brings the Teacher as a man into our minds, but also 
causes us to review the teachings. To notice in fact that 
they’re not just flat, prosaic statements; there’s a lot of 
poetry and wit in the texts. Elsewhere Beaver assesses 
the Buddha as ‘observant, wily, unpredictable, now 
humorous, now caustic …’ To me, that figures him as a

19
HAROLD BEAVER
Thai Forest master, or a Zen roshi: someone with whom 
one has to stay alert and hold all assumptions lightly. 
Surely that’s on the mark.
On occasion, however, the character sketch veers 
precariously close to depicting its creator. In Chapter 
1, when Ānanda (‘the fall-guy’) blithely comments that 
he understands the teaching on Dependent Co-Arising, 
Beaver’s Buddha
‘in exasperation, shook his head. He was simply not 
grasping the complexity of the doctrine, not penetrating it 
sufficiently. His mind was as muddled, the Buddha sighed, 
as “a snarled skein of yarn or a mildewed old bird’s nest.”’
The text (Mahanidan a Sutta, D 15:1) merely has the 
Buddha refuting Ānanda with ‘Don’t say that, Ānanda, 
don’t say that!’ and adding that it is through not 
understanding this teaching that ‘this generation [i.e. 
not just Ānanda] has become like a tangled ball of string, 
covered as with a blight ...’ More on that simile later. But 
despite this direct interjection by the Buddha, would 
we necessarily conclude that he was ‘exasperated’? 
Would he have shaken his head and sighed? Certainly 
some flesh and blood has been added to the words of 
the Buddha – but it looks to me like the Awakened One 
has here taken on the persona of a university lecturer 
dealing with one of his obtuse students. 
Nevertheless, you can’t go far in The Broken Gong 
before sensing Harold Beaver’s great esteem for the 
Buddha and his teaching. In a letter to me, Harold writes:

20
THE BROKEN GONG
‘it was of prime importance to me that the book should 
present an accurate and balanced account of the Dhamma 
while its portrait of the Buddha-as-teacher should nowhere 
detract from profound respect.’
And through offering us perspectives on the Buddha’s 
depth of thought and skill, The Broken Gong demonstrates 
these points time and time again. Since we’re never 
going to get an absolutely accurate portrait of the 
Buddha, Beaver has at least helped us to acknowledge 
the sheer strength of character of someone who not 
only survived 50 years of living on alms on the road 
in ancient India; who not only perfected meditation 
and insight in conditions that most of us would barely 
endure; who not only forged an Order out of a rag-tag 
fellowship of wanderers and at the same time parleyed 
with kings; but who also made teachings on liberation 
available to queens and matriarchs, farmers, thieves, 
and lepers, in a way that we can still make use of.
THE TRANSLATION
When we come to review Beaver’s translation of the 
suttas or Vinaya, particularly in the light of his aims to 
explore their lived-in background, it’s helpful to bear in 
mind that the texts themselves are not the exact words 
that the Buddha used. They are a standard rendition 
agreed upon by bhikkhus after the Buddha’s decease; 
their aim was to use consistently uniform phrases 
and formulas to encrypt the Dhamma for the sake of 
memorisation. So it was necessary for these texts to

21
HAROLD BEAVER
sacrifice the expression in order to preserve an accurate 
oral transmission of the meaning. Their language, Pali, 
was concocted as a lingua franca out of the vernacular 
dialects of the age. It’s as close as we’re going to get to 
what the Buddha meant; Pali is concocted out of the 
dialects that he actually used. But as to how he spoke 
… although he employed stock references (such as 
the Four Establishments of Mindfulness), it’s unlikely 
that the Buddha gave lectures or formulaic sermons. 
As with the Forest masters, any teaching best reaches 
the listener through a spontaneous weave around the 
standard themes. It’s difficult to believe that someone 
who used imagery and allegory in such an extensive 
way would have described each jhāna with the same 
set of words in each instance, or appended identical 
instructions on understanding the senses to each of 
the six senses, in effect saying the same thing six times 
over. When recited, this is useful; it drives the point 
into the memory. But what the listener’s ear picks up, 
the reader’s eye glosses over after the second iteration.
This is a problem that most translators skirt by 
replacing the repetitions with ellipses. Beaver, on the 
other hand, goes so far as to dismiss these renditions 
as ‘too literal, or clumsy, or unrhythmical, or poetic, 
or archaic, or repetitive (a marked feature of the Pali 
original), or awkwardly syncopated; almost nothing 
reads with the assured clarity and intensity and fluidity 
which are their most marked, original features.’
 His approach is to take his cue from the images the 
Buddha used, absorb their tone, context and wit, take

22
THE BROKEN GONG
into account who he was addressing, then adjust the 
rest of the language, and the Buddha himself, to fit. 
Risky indeed, but invigorating. 
There are pros and cons to doing this. It seems to 
me that Beaver sometimes goes too far, although in 
a stimulating way, when he builds characters out of 
his translations of the texts. But, on the other hand, his 
translations do bring the texts closer to the reader’s 
experience. He keeps to the meaning of the words, but 
plays with them, or uses alternatives when he deems 
it necessary to give them pungency. As with that 
‘mildewed old bird’s nest’ above: Beaver has rescued 
‘gulāguṇhika-jāta’ from Maurice Walshe’s translation 
of ‘covered as with a blight’ – which Walshe himself 
acknowledges in the endnote can be rendered by the 
more graphic ‘matted like a bird’s nest’. 
As another example, take the book’s epigraph, verse 
134 of the Dhammapada. A good standard translation 
– by Acharya Buddharakkhita (Buddhist Publication 
Society) – renders this as:
‘If, like a broken gong, you silence yourself, you have 
approached Nibbāna, for vindictiveness is no more in you.’
The Broken Gong has:
‘When, muffled as a broken gong,/ you don’t reverberate,/ 
you’ve reached Nibbāna:/ recrimination’s turmoil finally 
stilled in you.’
Whereas Buddharakkhita’s ‘silence yourself’ can 
carry nuances of suppression and censorship, Beaver’s 
‘don’t reverberate’ captures the awareness of the 
contemplative mind: we sense a mind that is receptive,

23
HAROLD BEAVER
but doesn’t react or proliferate into a monologue of 
discursive thoughts. Beaver’s reading of the text places 
the image more directly in our sensed reality.
His rendition of Saṁyutta Nikāya I, 1:20 as:
‘Those who live by names and concepts,/ Confident in 
names and concepts/ Discerning not the naming process,/ 
Are subject to the realm of Death.’ 
strikes me as more direct than Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s:
‘Beings who perceive what can be expressed/ Become 
established in what can be expressed./ Not fully 
understanding what can be expressed,/ They come under 
the yoke of Death.’ 
At another point in The Broken Gong, in the sutta 
translation in Chapter 10, there is a reference to the 
power of clairaudience. Walshe’s translation has: 
‘Just as a man going on a long journey might hear the 
sound of a big drum, a small drum, a conch, cymbals or 
kettle-drum …’
whereas with Beaver we actually hear those instruments:
‘Your Majesty, it’s just as if a traveller on a highway were to 
catch the boom of a kettledrum, or the throb of a tabor, or 
the wail of a conch-shell, or the rat-a-tat of a snare drum, 
or the clashing of cymbals.’
(D 2:90)
Another, even freer, rendition is in Chapter 3, where 
a passage from the Brahmajāla Sutta describing the 
quarrelling of the various ‘ascetics and Brahmans’ is 
cited (D 1:1.18). Walshe’s translation is:

24
THE BROKEN GONG
‘You said last what you should have said first, and you 
said first what you should have said last!’ ‘What you took 
so long to think up has been refuted!’ ‘Go on, save your 
doctrine – get out of that if you can!’
Beaver, surely bearing scenes of student debate in 
mind, has this as:
‘Your ideas are all screwed up. For all your homework 
– admit it! – I’ve got you scared. I’ve got you on the run. 
I’ve exposed your rotten arguments and refuted them till 
you’re utterly routed. Try wriggling out of that if you can.’ 
More colourful, less literal: what does this do for 
you? If you’re interested in experiencing the effects 
of language, I’d recommend placing The Broken Gong 
beside translations which offer a more standardized 
rendition of the texts; I think you will find the exercise 
illuminating and inspirational.

There have been numerous attempts at compiling a 
‘Life’ of the Buddha.1 Its tripart division was legendary: 
1. the princely upbringing and marriage from which 
he absconded (at the age of twenty-nine); 2. six years 
of ascetic wandering until his Enlightenment (at the 
age of thirty-five); 3. followed by forty-five years spent 
establishing a monastic order from the Ganges to the 
foothills of the Himalayas until his death (at the age of 
eighty).2 But this hardly helps trace his step-by-step 
spiritual development before Enlightenment or the 
multiplication and refinement of his insights during 
the long course of his career. Even the best of his 
biographers, Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli, had to superimpose 
an apparatus of idiosyncratic ‘voices’ and ‘narrators’, 
since the Pali Canon of suttas resolutely ignores 
chronology.
 ‘Thus have I heard’, their stock preliminary refrain, 
is invariably confirmed by locations in space – not 
time – while only rarely indicating what might (under 
other circumstances) be regarded as an independently 
verifiable event.3 Their canonic line-up, too, is wholly

26
THE BROKEN GONG
dependent on mnemonic criteria of subject matter 
(Saṁyutta Nikāya), or of length (Majjhima Nikāya, Dīgha 
Nikāya), or of haphazard arithmetic (Aṅguttara Nikāya ), 
while a numerology based on a steadily incremental 
sequence of dates – essential to our very notion of 
‘biography’ – is absent.
If a ‘Life of the Buddha’, then, must seem an 
implausible enterprise, what of a character sketch? 
What of a literary portrait of the Buddha as teacher? 
What of a dramatic probe into the whole culture 
through which he moved and taught: his attitude to 
princes and peasants, nature and landscape, poetry 
and rhetoric, rival sectarians and fellow ascetics? It is 
just such an enquiry that this study attempts. Literary, 
because the Buddha remains unique among the great 
founders of the world’s religions in his sensitivity to 
the very stuff of the language by means of which moral 
and spiritual insights are inevitably taught.
This is not, therefore, a celebration of the 
Buddha’s teachings, nor intended as a layman’s guide 
to their fundamental practise. Something of their 
systematic procedures and metaphysical concerns 
will doubtless emerge, but its aim is neither homiletic 
nor exegetic. Nor was it conceived as a contribution to 
philosophical, or historical, or philological research 
(to which I am indebted), but rather to extend the 
scope of literary scholarship and humanist debate. 
To read these 2,500-year-old Buddhist documents 
as a task of literary interpretation and textual 
analysis seems never before to have been attempted.

27
HAROLD BEAVER
Commentaries, translations, and pseudo -biographies 
of the Buddha abound, but nothing remotely akin 
to The Art of Buddhist Narrative, or A Literary Guide to 
the Suttas , or The Suttas as Literature  (to adapt three 
titles by Robert Alter, Frank Kermode and Northrop 
Frye).4 Partly, of course, this is due to the dearth 
of story-telling, in any relevant sense at all. But 
there may well be ‘codes’; there may well be ‘art’; 
there are certainly similes and parables galore. The 
suttas may prove as far from naïve as Plato’s (near 
contemporary) adaptation of the Socratic dialogue.
Attention is chiefly focused on the following 
themes: the circumstances of their composition; 
their linguistic and grammatical self-awareness; their 
aesthetic and rhetorical strategies; their dialectical 
origins in philosophical debate; their concern with 
the function of art and the imagination; their literary 
tropes, especially of simile and allegory; their extensive 
mirroring of everyday life; their debt to other itinerant 
traditions (specifically those of actors and rhapsodes); 
their reliance on folk tales, above all those of animal 
lore; their irony and oral humour; their larger 
symbolic structure, incorporating the whole panorama 
of social existence; and the inscrutable problem
of their transmission. 
Put another way, this is not an enquiry into Buddhism 
relating to questions of meditation, or of mysticism, 
or of the cognitive sciences, or of consciousness, or of 
neurobiology, or of ethics, or of anthropology, or of the 
nature of reality (from Thales to Kant), or of physics

28
THE BROKEN GONG
(from Einstein to Heisenberg and Max Planck), or of its 
influence on the West (from Schopenhauer to Emerson, 
Thoreau and T. S. Eliot). It is an entirely literary 
investigation, with all the attendant pitfalls that 
this implies. Yet as Kafka blithely concluded about a 
problematic reading of one of his own darkest parables: 
‘Commentators say: “The correct interpretation of 
a certain subject and misunderstanding of the same 
subject do not wholly exclude each other.”’5
Quite other anxieties, though, may be stirred. 
‘Either/Or’, some will maintain. ‘Stick either to 
literature or to religion.’ But don’t all propositions, all 
debates, all stories raise explanatory choices? It is not 
faith so much as the formulas used to inspire faith that 
call for interpretation. This whole enquiry pivots on 
Chapter 6, with its ever-widening focus on daily life in 
the Buddha’s India: the first five chapters exploring the 
more abstruse questions of language and art, including 
figures of speech; the final six chapters, the banter of 
dialect jokes, folklore and oral culture. In conclusion, 
two suttas (in unabridged translation) present the 
comeuppance of two Machiavellian rulers acutely 
conscious of the new sophistries sweeping the land, but 
eager to manipulate them for their own ends.
*  *  *
Step by relentless step, a royal usurper is exposed 
as rash, and fallible, and deluded even by his own 
worldly standards. The Dhamma itself never wavers. 
The Buddha always remains self-consistent. Though

29
HAROLD BEAVER
naturally he adjusted his mode of address when 
challenged by peasants or village headmen, Jain rivals 
or Brahman priests. The discrepancy of tone – his 
chameleon-like shifts of behaviour – involved neither 
role-playing nor furtive manipulations of any kind. 
Like a good lawyer, rather, he was versatile in his 
approach, alert in the choice and presentation of his 
arguments from one debate to the next. His nightlong vigil with an unscrupulous king (Chapter 10), or 
a disciple’s patient humouring of a humourless prince 
(Chapter 11), pinpoints unique events. Collectively, 
the suttas comprise a vast repertoire of such
impromptu ‘turns’.
In a teasing simile the Buddha once compared a 
persistent questioner to a land-bird so disorientated 
when released at sea that it flew from horizon to 
horizon until, foiled, it circled back and back again 
over the ship’s deck. As if on the featureless and 
ever-shifting ocean of life the Buddha were the one 
fixed point of salvation. 6 That unerring swoop of the 
imagination typifies the man. ‘Of course, in the case 
of the Buddha,’ an abbot recently warned, ‘statements 
about personality must be speculative; but a careful 
reading of the suttas, whose aim ... is to present the 
Dhamma, not the personality of the Master, reveals a 
man’ of ‘great wit ... a character that could be serene, 
warm and comforting, or ferocious. A leader, in fact ...’7
If the portrayal convinces, it can only be because 
it is internally self-consistent, not because it can be 
historically confirmed. Like Socrates, like Jesus, the

30
THE BROKEN GONG
Buddha himself recorded nothing. So there’s no 
escaping fiction. The Buddha of the suttas, like King 
Ajātasattu or Prince Pāyāsi, must ultimately be read as 
a character in fiction: observant, wily, unpredictable, 
now humorous, now caustic, unshakeably convinced of 
his own transcendent leap into some form of profound 
and permanent experience. Without further secondary 
sources, what other ‘reading’ could there be?
*  *  *
An implicit challenge is mounted here: that a literary 
approach to sacred texts outside the Judaeo-Christian 
tradition is feasible despite their overwhelming 
abundance, despite their wholesale repetitions, 
despite their complete lack of plot or narrative line. 
All religions are built on tropes: for Buddhists the key 
tropes being that of a path, or way, leading to the shock 
of awakening. Are Buddhist parables, then, symptomatic 
or emblematic of this awakening? In fact, are they 
parables at all? Or should they be read as allegories? 
Or, in Bultmann’s terms, as Bildwörter (figurative 
sayings)? Or Gleichnisse (similes or metaphors)? 8 One 
thing is certain, that it can be said of the Buddha as has 
been said of Jesus: ‘If the parables are taken as a whole, 
their realism is remarkable’, giving ‘a more complete 
picture’ of aristocratic, bourgeois and peasant life than 
we possess for any other archaic society.9
But, unlike Jesus, the Buddha was acutely conscious 
not only of the inherent drawbacks of a single dialect,

31
HAROLD BEAVER
but the instability of all language – of communication 
in itself. Perhaps that’s why he favoured allegories over 
parables, since allegories forge arbitrary connections 
between evanescent fragments of our experience while 
retaining a clear-eyed sense of their arbitrariness. By 
allowing for all kinds of peculiar resemblances, that 
is, they demonstrate that any set of singular relations 
may spring from a specific viewpoint.
Complementary ironies may at any time surface. 
It should come as no surprise, then, to learn that the 
Buddha was a stickler for verbal accuracy. Instability 
compelled close reading. Precision, in an ambivalent 
world, was crucial. He pulled his novices and monks 
up sharp for the slightest vagaries of slack phrasing 
in conversation or debate. The bhikkhu needed to 
master both the ars intelligendi and the ars explicandi (in 
medieval Latin terms) – both the art of understanding 
and the art of presentation. 10 The Venerable Udena, in 
debate with a Brahman, put it succinctly:
‘If you agree with any statement of mine, then concede it; if 
you think any statement arguable, contest it; and if you fail 
to grasp the meaning of any statement of mine, enquire 
further about it ... That way there can be conversation 
between us.’ 11
Such cautions, it seems, were wholly formulaic; 
and the Buddha himself tried similar measures in a 
debate with a wealthy Jain.12 But he was horrified when 
precautions were flouted. Every question should be 
analysed before being answered, he insisted; every

32
THE BROKEN GONG
answer duly qualified. 13 Similarly, every so-called 
‘quotation’ from his teaching should first be tested: 
was it perhaps misunderstood and wrongly expressed?; 
or misunderstood, though correctly expressed?; 
or if wrongly expressed, correctly understood?; or 
both correctly understood and correctly expressed? 
For example, in the case of a solecism through 
misunderstanding:
‘Friend, if you mean “x”, you should express it either 
like this or like that. Which is more appropriate? But if 
you say “y”, you may mean either this or that. Which is 
more relevant?’14
The analytic and textual bias of this study, then, far 
from going against the grain of the Buddha’s teaching, 
turns out to be Buddhist par excellence. In fact, the 
Buddha must be numbered among the first to insist on 
just this kind of linguistic, logical, critical endeavour.
*  *  *
But the Buddha kept no appointment with time. 
His intense focus on language ignored (as we saw) 
the complexities of an accumulative, or narrative, 
time.15 Which automatically excluded any notion of a 
Messianic, or apocalyptic, fulfilment in time. Time, for 
the Buddha, was simply the stuff of the daily recurrent 
round, repeated in larger and larger cycles of lunar 
months and solar years, compounded at last into those 
perennial ages (of gold, or silver, or bronze, or iron) 
common to all Aryan peoples.16

33
HAROLD BEAVER
The suttas, accordingly, could accommodate both 
utopian idylls – such as that Land of Cockaigne:
‘Whose menfolk live in happiness 
Without possessions, without wives, 
Without the need to scatter seed, 
Without the need to draw a plough, 
Where ripened crops themselves do reach 
Into their hands to pick and eat ...’17
– outside time, and those fabled, mind-boggling 
revolutions, begun in some primordial age, under some 
‘Ariyan wheel-turning monarch’, 18 that systematically 
degenerate from poverty to theft, to murder, to lying, 
to slander, to adultery, to incest and homosexuality, 
with an ever-diminishing human lifespan: a dissolution 
which, in its turn, responds to an ever-present, everthrobbing pulse – the systole and diastole, as it were, of 
our contracting and expanding universe.19
So what in Genesis is seen as a unique, inaugural 
event, is introduced by the Aggañña Sutta as merely one 
start among many:
‘At that time waters everywhere surged out of darkness 
– blinding darkness without distinction of stars or 
constellations, sun or moon, night or day, months or years, 
male or female even – until the sweet earth spread above 
the surge like the skin that forms and puckers on hot milk 
as it cools. And the colour of that skin resembled butter or 
fine ghee; and it tasted like pure wild honey.’20

34
THE BROKEN GONG
That same darkness, those same waters, of course, 
usher in the Torah:
‘And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness 
was upon the face of the deep ... And God said, Let there be 
light ... and God divided the light from the darkness. And 
God called the light Day and the darkness he called Night 
... And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of 
the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters ... 
and it was so. And God called the firmament Heaven ... And 
God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered 
together unto one place and let the dry land appear: 
and it was so. And God called the dry land Earth; and the 
gathering together of the waters called he Seas ...’21
But how differently each is dramatized! The Hebrew 
creation story rehearses an analytical sorting process 
which boldly specifies and systematizes phenomena 
under their common rubrics. Its creator-god is akin to 
a decisive surgeon, or shrewd geometer (like Blake’s 
‘The Ancient of Days’), plunging down his screwcompass or dividers. 22 His slicing incisions inaugurate 
time, wholly oblivious, as yet, of any presentiment of 
sin. The Buddha, on the other hand, applies a sensuous, 
everyday simile (‘hot milk as it cools’) – typical of his 
subtly mobile imagery (to be discussed in Chapter 
4) – and that domestic metamorphosis quite clearly 
inaugurates time as a moral process:
‘Then one deva thought: “Hey! What can this be?” and dug 
in and licked a finger. The others seeing how he relished 
the taste, tried it too. And such a longing seized them that

35
HAROLD BEAVER
they started breaking off whole chunks with their hands 
and stuffing them into their mouths until slowly their 
luminosity began to fade; and, as it faded, the sun and 
moon glimmered overhead. That’s how, from that time on, 
they began distinguishing night from day, months from 
the year and its seasons.’
That gobbling greed (the Buddha’s version of 
original sin) inevitably leads to sexual craving. Here it 
is not narrative time that inaugurates lust, but lust that 
reveals the wheeling processes of time. It is impetuous 
human choice that causes – almost conjures up – the 
phenomena of sun and moon, night and day. For the 
Buddha, it was always individual responsibility and 
individual action that were given absolute priority.
*  *  *
Despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, 
though, the Buddha is still often maligned as a 
technically dry, flat-footed pedant. Most recently by 
Roberto Calasso:
‘The Buddha rarely uses images – and when he does so 
they are very simple, to be cherished like talismans ... 
Often they alluded and referred back to Vedic images, to 
those times when everything that was said was imagery. 
But the allusion was not meant to be noticed ... [As] used 
by the Buddha; what stood out most in the image was this 
dryness, this draining away of every drop of sap ...’

36
THE BROKEN GONG
Or again:
‘Outside the mind, he didn’t mention so much as a 
blade of grass. He rarely used similes, and when he did 
they were always the same, and almost always made do 
with poor materials. Sometimes he mentioned the lotus 
plant. Animals he mentioned were the elephant and the 
antelope.’23
A list of similes running to more than 168 items, 
appended to a recent edition of the Majjhima Nikāya 
alone, is enough to show how exaggerated such 
observations are.24 For a twenty-one-strong bestiary of 
spiritual archetypes, see Chapter 8. The whole impetus 
of this study is in tacit contradiction to such haphazard 
and sweeping aspersions.
*  *  *
‘What do you think about me?’
the Buddha once confronted his bhikkhus.
‘That the reclusive Gotama teaches Dhamma for the sake 
of his robes?’ he teased. ‘Or that he teaches Dhamma for 
the sake of his alms-food? Or that he teaches Dhamma 
for the sake of his lodging? Or that he teaches Dhamma 
for the sake of merit in expectation of higher things?’ 
‘Venerable sir,’  they answered , ‘we think the Blessed 
One is compassionate; concerned for our welfare; that he 
teaches Dhamma out of compassion.’ 25

37
HAROLD BEAVER
It was a disarming reply. But what if we were 
asked the same question today? How would we reply? 
Unused to the sardonic tone, we might well fudge the 
issue. Especially since the Buddha’s impact clearly 
stemmed as much from his personal charisma as from 
his physique.
Not that The Broken Gong is preoccupied with mere 
physique. Or mystique, for that matter. Yet in dealing 
as it does with less tangible ‘marks of a Great Man’ – 
his social versatility, his self-mocking sarcasm, his 
absorption in language, his burlesque allusions, his 
ironic detachment, the whole incalculable range of 
his intellectual and imaginative play – it too attempts 
to confront that brisk challenge: ‘What do you think 
about me?’ 26
Our answer will inevitably centre less on 
‘compassion’ or ‘mindfulness’ than on the restoration 
of his Buddhahood to the whole culture from which 
it sprang, by tracking his dodging similes out of the 
shadows into sunlight, out of dreams into mirrors, out 
of footpaths into highways, out of orchards into villages, 
out of cesspits into mountain lakes – by restoring the 
Buddha himself to the Indian subcontinent through 
which he roamed, as universal teacher, more than 
2,500 years ago.

1
‘Monks, this Dhamma so well proclaimed by me is plain, 
open, explicit, free of patchwork.’1
It was the Buddha’s proudest boast that the Dhamma 
(conflating both our sense of ‘law’ and ‘teaching of 
the law’) formed a single, seamless fabric: ‘lovely in 
its beginning, lovely in its middle and lovely in its 
ending, both in spirit and in letter’. 2 Metaphors drawn 
from spinning and textile weaving were fundamental 
to such Buddhist terminology: a sutta is literally a 
‘thread’ of an argument; pāḷi means simply a ‘text 
for recitation’. Pāḷi bhāsā , in other words, is the ‘text 
language’ of all the original Buddhist scriptures, known 
to the commentators as Magadhan; for it was in the 
kingdom of Magadha that the Buddha spent most of 
the last twenty years of his life under the protection 
of King Bimbisāra. In the Theravāda tradition, Pali is 
solely reserved for the Buddha’s teachings; it appears 
in no other literature.

39
HAROLD BEAVER
The woof and the warp of an argument, however, 
may also turn into a net. ‘Bear in mind,’ the Buddha 
explained to his cousin Ānanda, ‘that this exposition 
of the Dhamma is called Atthajāla, the Net of Essence, 
as well as Dhammajāla, the Net of the Dhamma, as well 
as Brāhmajāla, the Net of Perfect Wisdom, as well as 
Diṭṭhijāla, the Net of Views.’3 The mesh is exact, perfect 
and all-encompassing:
‘Monks, ponder this simile! When a skilled fisherman, or his 
apprentice, spreads out a fine net on the waters of a lake, 
he will infer: “Since all sizeable fish have been trapped, 
whether they rise or sink, they’ll do so within the net ...” In 
much the same way, samaṇas and brāhmanas ... despite 
their many conflicting views, differ in sixty-two ways, which 
all fall within the net of this discourse.’4
Likewise, Buddhist commentaries refer to ‘the Net 
of his Knowledge’, calling his eye ‘the Net of Great 
Compassion’.5 
The Dhamma, then, is proclaimed as tenacious, 
consistent, all of a piece, devoid of the ragged texture 
of something stitched or cobbled together. Unlike 
the Bible, say, with its Old and New Testaments; or 
the Hebrew Bible with its patchwork of myths and 
chronicles, prophecies and psalms; unlike even the 
Torah (also denoting both ‘law’ and ‘instruction’) 
whose five books ascribed to Moses were translated 
into Greek as the Pentateuch.
*  *  *

40
THE BROKEN GONG
But to insist on instruction devoid of all patchwork 
is to ignore the patchwork order of language itself. 
Therein lies the inherent paradox of Buddhism. 
When the Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita once asked: 
‘What is the deliverance of mind that is signless?’ the 
Venerable Sāriputta replied: ‘There, abstaining from 
all signs, a bhikkhu enters, and abides in, the signless 
concentration of mind’.6 He abides, that is, in animittaceto-samādhi, a dilution of self no longer dependent on 
any kind of semiotics or semantics. As the Dhammapada 
puts it: ‘Those who never accumulate ... range across 
the signless void of perfect freedom; their course 
indeed is hard to trace as that of birds through space.’7
For language consists of a mesh of signs as opposed 
to nibbāna, which is ‘signless’. Whatever symbols or 
shapes (nimitta) may appear in meditation, they neither 
should, nor can, be conceptualized; for nibbāna is, by 
definition, animitta-cetovimutti, a ‘signless deliverance 
of mind’. So ‘this Dhamma so well proclaimed’, by 
concepts and signs, paradoxically has as its aim a 
self-cancelling sign, a ‘signless’ sign, beyond the 
reach of signs, which must by definition be declared 
‘Undeclared’.8
*  *  *
K’ung Fu-tse, the Buddha’s contemporary, faced no 
such problem. * Confucius, as we call him, envisaged 
men as essentially social creatures.
* Current scholarship suggests that K’ung Fu-tse preceded the Buddha 
by about a century. (Ed.)

41
HAROLD BEAVER
‘If the terms are incorrect,’ he reprimanded his most 
impetuous student,
‘language is without an object. When language is without 
an object, no business can be executed. When no business 
can be executed, rites and music do not flourish. When 
rites and music do not flourish, punishments and penalties 
become arbitrary. When punishments and penalties 
become arbitrary, the people do not know where they 
stand. Therefore, whatever a wise man conceives, he must 
always be able to say; and whatever he says, he must be 
able to put into practice. In the matter of language, a wise 
man leaves nothing to chance.’9
But for the Buddha there was no such validating link 
between proper language and proper action, society and 
life. A fugitive correlation at best. Language, rather, was 
a distorting medium whose formal stability misleads us 
into assuming a corresponding fixity in the ever-mobile 
phenomena to which it refers. Such mutual mirroring, 
however, is delusive; the relationship, mismatched. 
Those formal elements of language (phonemes) and 
their structure (syntax) consist of a relatively stable 
and iterative system of signs, whereas the phenomenal 
world of temporal process is in unceasing flux where 
no passing moment – nothing – can be repeated.
As Henri Bergson, millennia later, was to reassert: 
the role of language is an inevitable evil because it 
enacts an illusory power of arrest over the temporal 
process by projecting a concept of fixity on to life.
*  *  *

42
THE BROKEN GONG
It was this mismatch, this misfit, that the Buddha 
repeatedly probed and tested. Had not his own 
Awakening, his Buddhahood, been ‘well proclaimed’? 
Yet all verbal signs were suspect. All signs might need to 
be neutralized or cancelled. As for those in commonest 
use, those on everyone’s lips, they might even have to be 
multiplied into a variety of more specific designations. 
That is, before cancelling an inherently empty sign, such 
as the ‘self’, it might prove necessary, for argument’s 
sake, to subdivide the term into: 1. the coarse (physical) 
self; 2. the mind-constituted self (in meditation); and 3. 
the formless self (created by consciousness). Though all 
three cannot be conceived simultaneously. One mode, 
at any one time, necessarily excludes the others: the 
coarse debarring the mental, the mental debarring the 
formless.10 Not that the Buddha was in any way intent 
on exorcising, or revolutionizing, common usage:
‘That monk might still use words like “I” , 
Perchance might say, “They call this mine.” 
Aware of common worldly terms,
He’d speak conforming to such use.’11
The question, rather, was how to screen the 
haphazard flood of impressions (visual, aural, 
nasal, tactile); how best to employ the adventitious 
resources of language that dissect or analyse the flux 
of phenomena. ‘Who in the rainbow can draw the line’, 
asked Melville, ‘where the violet tint ends and the 
orange tint begins? Distinctly we see the difference 
of the colors, but where exactly does the one first

43
HAROLD BEAVER
blendingly enter into the other?’ 12 The Buddha turned 
his discriminating eye on the dairy. At what stage, he 
asked, is fresh milk no longer milk but curd? Or curd no 
longer curd but cream? Or cream no longer cream but 
butter? Or butter no longer butter but clarified butter, 
or ghee, or cream of ghee?
‘From the cow we get fresh milk, Citta; from the milk, curds; 
from the curds, cream; from the cream, butter; from the 
butter, ghee; and from the ghee, cream of ghee. And while 
it is fresh milk, we don’t speak of curds, or cream, or butter, 
or ghee, or cream of ghee; we just call it milk. And when 
it has become curds, we don’t speak of milk, or cream, 
or butter, or ghee, or cream of ghee; we just call it curds. 
And when it has become cream, we don’t speak of milk, 
or curds, or butter, or ghee, or cream of ghee; we just call 
it cream. And so too with butter, and ghee, and cream of 
ghee. Exactly the same goes for the coarse, physical self; 
whenever the physical self is assertive, we don’t consider 
the mind-made or the formless one; whenever the mindmade self is active, we don’t consider the coarse or the 
formless one; whenever the formless one is all-pervasive, 
we don’t consider the physical or the mental one.’13
For everything is labile, the world as well as the 
language that encodes it. Three lessons are implicit here: 
first, the analogy from milk evokes a constant state of 
transformation; second, linguistic differentiation can 
intervene to classify this flux only at significant (signintensive) moments; third, these verbal designations 
themselves must be viewed, in Derrida’s phrase, sous 
rature, under continual erasure.

44
THE BROKEN GONG
Ultimately, they must be regarded as under 
permanent erasure, since, overindulged, they will 
suggest coherent, consistent or ideal entities by an 
excessive reliance on language. So even linguistic 
classification must in the end be relinquished. Signs 
are either empty or should repeatedly be emptied, 
displaced, uprooted. In a slippery world, language itself 
cannot claim an innocently fixed status.
‘For, Citta,’ the Buddha concludes,
‘these are merely names, expressions, turns of speech, 
designations in common use in the world, which the 
Tathāgata uses without misapprehension; uses to conform 
to common prejudice without clinging to them.’
In the most complex of his expositions, the Buddha 
elucidated ‘the fundamental modes of all phenomena’, 
enumerating twenty-four concepts, beginning with 
‘earth’, ‘fire’, ‘air’, and moving through the realm of 
devas to reach the realms of infinite space, of infinite 
consciousness, and ultimately nibbāna. 14 The average, 
typically uninstructed person, he argued, can grasp 
the concept ‘earth’, say, by imagining ‘earth as such’ 
(the signified), or ‘on the earth’, or ‘in the earth’, or 
‘apart from the earth’ (prepositional usages), or ‘earth 
as mine’ (possessive usage); but by running the word 
through various grammatical inflections, he inevitably 
confuses such inflections with phenomenology as if 
there existed a Grammar of Nature, or Natural Syntax. 
The Arahant, the perfected monk, to the contrary, 
does not ‘imagine earth as such’; he is not misled by 
grammatical forms; he does not reify concepts:

45
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Those who live by names and concepts, 
Confident in names and concepts, 
Discerning not the naming process, 
Are subject to the realm of Death.
Who labels not, holds no conceits, 
Has cut off lust for name-and-form.’15
*  *  *
To the perils of the imagination I return later. Here it 
is enough to indicate how the Buddha – unlike any rival 
religious leader of his own or later time – was ‘anxious 
to avoid disputes which are purely verbal in character 
and the confusions which arise when we transgress the 
limits of linguistic convention.’16
Rule One: avoid the multiplication of terms, 
especially of terms derived from some local or regional 
dialect. That is, ‘Don’t cling to vernacular usage or 
override convention’:17
‘And how does one cling to vernacular usage and override 
convention? By dogmatically maintaining, for example, 
that a certain object called a “dish” [pāti] in one part of 
the country, or a “bowl” [patta] in another, or a “vessel” 
[vittha] in another, or again a “saucer” [serāva], or a 
“pan” [dhāropa], or a “pot” [poṇa], or a “cup” [hana], or 
a “basin” [pisīla] in yet another, must invariably be called 
either a “dish” , or a “bowl” , or a “vessel” , or a “saucer” , 
or a “pan” , or a “pot” , or a “cup” , or a “basin” in each and 
every locality, insisting “This alone is the proper usage; 
all the rest are mistaken.” That would be an extreme case
of local prejudice.’

46
THE BROKEN GONG
Avoid value-laden, normative judgements, that is; 
only descriptive formulas are acceptable:
‘But if one varies the terminology as one travels through 
different regions, continually bearing in mind how these 
terms are variously applied to the same household object, 
then all partisan bias would be avoided.’
For matters of nomenclature should never be 
prescriptive. A dispute about whether to call a 
particular bowl a ‘basin’, or a ‘pan’, or a ‘dish’ is just 
a verbal convention, relating to various paradigms 
of linguistic usage, not to close observations. It is the 
event, not the description of an event, which must 
always remain paramount. 
In non-Buddhist traditions, language itself was 
regarded as an intrinsic and infallible sign of divine 
dispensation as if Brāhma or Jahweh, say, had endowed 
each created object with its own unique awareness 
(ñāṇa), form (rūpa) and function (karma). But for the 
Buddha language is a human construction; and a mark 
of its human origin is precisely the arbitrariness of 
its signs, which are capable of endless temporal shifts 
and geographical variation. This accounts for their 
range, and their capacity for continual modification 
and eventual obsolescence. As well as their limitations 
and puzzling ambiguities. For it is the implicit nature 
of language, not merely its regional variety, which is 
prone to mislead.
So Rule Two: watch your language, keep it taut and 
clear, avoiding as far as possible ambiguities liable to

47
HAROLD BEAVER
nonsensical or bogus metaphysical implications. Always 
bear in mind the distinction between a meaningful 
statement (sappāṭihīrakataṁ bhāsitaṁ sampajjati), which 
is apposite, well-reasoned and comprehensible, and 
a meaningless statement (appāṭihīrakataṁ bhāsitaṁ 
sampajjati), which is inapposite, ill-reasoned and 
incomprehensible. The following dialogue offers an 
amusing example:
THE BUDDHA: ‘If this fire in front of you were to blow out, 
Vaccha, what would you say? Would you say to yourself, 
“Oh, the fire’s blown out!”?’
VACCHA: ‘No doubt I would, venerable sir. Once I’d realized 
the fire had blown out.’
THE BUDDHA: ‘Now if someone were to ask you, “In what 
direction has it blown? Has the fire blown to the East, or 
to the West, or to the North, or to the South?” How would 
you reply?’
VACCHA: ‘I would reply, “That’s not an appropriate 
question,” good Gotama. In fact, it’s a silly question. The 
fire blew out, as we say, because it had burned through all 
the sticks and grass. I should have fed it more fuel. It was a 
lack of fuel that extinguished the fire.’18
While it makes sense to wonder, ‘Which way did 
the dog run?’ or ‘Where did the leaf blow?’ or even ‘In 
which direction did the fire spread?’ it is nonsensical 
to ask, ‘In which direction did the fire disappear?’ 
Such questions are easily enough put, as if soliciting 
an either/or reply. But it is in the nature of fire to be 
extinguished; and extinction differs from movement. 
Where categories are violated, a grammatically correct

48
THE BROKEN GONG
form does not necessarily admit a correct reply. The 
Buddha was setting Vaccha a trap: a ‘two-horned 
question’ as it was known in his time, what we might 
call a rhetorical double-bind. 19 There are dilemmas 
that simply cannot be answered on the verbal basis 
presented. They offer mutually conflicting claims. 
When posed such a question himself, the Buddha 
ducked: ‘There is no outright answer to that, Prince,’ 
he replied.20
For answer as you will, you’re mired in nonsense, 
as Lewis Carroll, the master of such nonsensical traps, 
well knew. At the very opening of Alice’s Adventures 
in Wonderland, when shrunk to some ten inches high, 
Alice introduces a conundrum on much the same lines:
‘First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she 
was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous 
about this; “for it might end, you know,” said Alice to 
herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I 
wonder what I should be like then?” And she tried to fancy 
what the flame of a candle looks like after the candle is 
blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen
such a thing.’21
This was later developed by Wittgenstein, when 
engaged in the self-same battle on the Buddha’s side. 
‘Thus it can come about,’ he wrote, ‘that we aren’t able 
to rid ourselves of the implications of our symbolism, 
which seems to admit of a question like “Where does 
the flame of a candle go to when it’s blown out?” 
“Where does the light go to?” We have become obsessed

49
HAROLD BEAVER
with our symbolism. We may say that we are led into 
puzzlement by an analogy which irresistibly drags 
us on.’ 22 For a meaningless question can only elicit a 
perverse choice of meaningless answers. Nonsense 
is built into the very fluidity and enticement of
linguistic usage.
So avoid nonsense! But further avoid metaphysical 
absurdities. Long before the pronouncement of 
Occam’s razor, the Buddha warned against the frantic 
multiplication of assumed entities. Take again the 
case of fresh milk which changes, stage by stage, 
into curd, cream, butter and ghee. Each stage of this 
process should only be called by the name appropriate 
to it; conventional speech norms should never be 
overstepped; that is, curds should always be called 
‘curds’ and not be confused with the names ‘milk’ or 
‘butter’. For should such confusion flourish, it might 
further be assumed that each of these names signifies 
an entity within the changing process; that ‘milk’ or 
‘butter’ is in some mysterious way present as an entity 
in ‘curds’, as if each term denotes a substance ‘X’ which 
persists without being perceived.
This is an essential step of the Buddha’s argument. 
For on this very milk analogy depends his discussion 
of the self: the so-called physical self, the mental self 
and the formless self (to use their ‘worldly names’). Just 
as there is no permanent, metaphysical substratum ‘X’ 
in milk or butter, the Buddha argues, so there is no 
permanent, metaphysical entity corresponding to the 
word ‘self’, or attā, within our person or body. The very

50
THE BROKEN GONG
concept of ‘Being’ becomes plausible only by a violation 
of ‘linguistic conventions’. 23 If ‘Being’ is identical with 
‘what exists’, then only the specious present has 
‘Being’, since both the past and the future do not exist 
at the present moment. So when we talk of the concept 
of ‘Being’ without time-coordinates, we violate norms 
by implying that the past as well as the future ‘exist’ 
in the sense that the present can be said to exist. The 
Buddha’s marked preference is for the term ‘bhava’, the 
process of becoming.
To sum up: avoid all ambiguity as far as possible. 
One way, throughout the Nikayās, of achieving this goal 
was to specify groups of words which were, or were 
not, synonymous. Vernacular synonyms abounded, as 
already observed, for such everyday articles as cups and 
bowls. But the problem went deeper. When asked, ‘Do 
different words necessarily have different meanings, 
or may they share the same meanings despite their 
verbal differences?’ Sāriputta replied: ‘There is a way in 
which the meanings are different as well as the words 
and a way in which the meanings are the same, the 
words alone being different.’ 24 That is, in some cases 
substitutions can be made; in others, they cannot. They 
can be made, possibly, when two terms share a common 
root. For it was a contemporary truism that similar 
meanings derived from a shared, or similar, etymology; 
dissimilar meanings from a disparate, or dissimilar, 
etymology.25 That is perhaps why the Buddha brazenly 
distorted the etymology of widespread terms when he 
wished to reinvent them in some new way, explicating

51
HAROLD BEAVER
brāhmana, or Brahman, for example, as derived from 
bāhitapāpo ti brāhmano (‘because he has cast out evil’), 
and rūpa, ‘form’ or ‘body’, from ruppattī ti tasmā rūpan ti 
vuccati, kena ruppati? sītena, uṇhena  (‘that by which one 
is afflicted; afflicted with what? With heat, cold, etc.’).26 
All of which now seems a wholly implausible exercise. 
What the Buddha nowhere discussed, however, was 
a third group of words: similar-sounding but with 
dissimilar meanings, to which he himself was partial. 
This could be because he felt that homonyms, or puns, 
stand at a potential crossroads of meaning and so, 
far from vague or evasive, prompt and sharpen our 
awareness of divergence, their sudden metamorphoses 
teasing us into a puzzled reminder of the flux of 
language. To Buddhist fun with puns I shall return later.
*  *  *
The Buddha had a relentlessly analytical cast of 
mind. Yet nowhere did he attempt to control, or 
suppress, what we might call the ‘play’ of signifiers. 
He acknowledged that play, rather, while alerting his 
various interlocutors to the pitfalls of semiological 
slippage and indeterminacy. For forty-five years he 
continued to proclaim the Dhamma as plainly as he 
could by verbal means; in self-imposed exile from an 
order empty of determinate meaning, without need of 
interpretation, forever mocking man’s limited efforts 
at signification. As Chuang-tzu, his Chinese close 
contemporary, exclaimed:

52
THE BROKEN GONG
‘The purpose of words is to convey ideas;
When the ideas are grasped, the words are forgotten. 
Where can I find a man who has forgotten words?
He is the man I would like to talk to.’27
It is a lesson that Ralph Waldo Emerson marvellously 
translated to a New England context. ‘For all symbols 
are fluxional,’ he taught; ‘all language is vehicular 
and transitive, and is good, as ferries and horses are, 
for conveyance, not as farms and houses are, for 
homestead.’28 All life is a lesson in paṭinissagga, or 
letting go. That means our most intimate relations 
and possessions and attainments, including language. 
Even the Dhamma itself in the end. ‘I shall show you, 
monks,’ the Buddha began in what is perhaps his most 
powerful parable, ‘how the Dhamma resembles a raft 
– designed for a particular, practical purpose, not for 
retention as an unwieldy keepsake.’ 29 Build a raft by 
all means and use it to cross, or descend, a river. But 
once that aim is achieved, your journey accomplished, 
dump it. Dump the raft, or the ferry, or the horse; dump 
language, dump the Dhamma. Don’t go carting them 
around on your back forever. Don’t make a homestead, 
or a museum, or an encyclopedia of your life – all 
‘impractical keepsakes’ that will only hold you back, tie 
you down and finally paralyse you.
*  *  *
Such comparisons came readily to the Buddha. For 
all his analytical drive, he thought in images; or perhaps

53
HAROLD BEAVER
he merely taught in them. They occurred constantly 
and instinctively to his mind. ‘Just as the great ocean 
has only one taste,’ he proclaimed, ‘the taste of salt, so 
has this teaching only one taste, the taste of freedom.’30 
Not only did the Dhamma form a single seamless 
fabric but (to switch metaphors) it was permeated by 
a single pervading savour. His repertoire of oceans 
and streams, bees and flowers, ox-carts and chariots, 
was drawn from the vivid, communal, everyday world 
of Indian experience. Mainly he sought natural or 
social analogies for his spiritual insights, but as deftly 
he could transform a worldly scene by a spiritual 
interpretation. The traffic was in a constant two-way 
motion: from spiritual to natural, or social to spiritual, 
as in his answer to Ānanda’s request for a description 
of a ‘divine chariot’ according to the Dhamma.
The occasion was this: a Brahman arrayed from 
top to toe in white, wearing white sandals and ‘even 
being fanned with a white fan’, had just driven a 
white chariot, drawn by four white mares in white 
harnesses, out of the gates of Sāvatthī. ‘How simply 
divine!’ onlookers exclaimed. ‘What a simply divine 
chariot!’ At which point Ānanda turned to his cousin, 
the Buddha, and asked: ‘Can such a “divine chariot” be 
found anywhere in the Dhamma?’ The words ‘divine 
chariot’ suggest that he may have been thinking of a 
temple-car, or rath, such as the famous juggernaut of 
the Jaggannath temple at Puri in Orissa. Most Hindu 
temples still have their wooden raths, and their image in 
sculptured stone is one of the earliest surviving motifs

54
THE BROKEN GONG
of Indian architecture. What Ānanda naïvely asked, in 
effect, was: at what rath can a Buddhist point to match 
a Hindu juggernaut? ‘He can, Ānanda,’ the Buddha 
replied, ‘he can. The “divine chariot” is a name for the 
Noble Eightfold Path; also called “car” of the Dhamma 
for achieving “peerless victory in battle”.’31
Just such a ‘peerless victory’ was the culmination 
of his own Enlightenment. In his very first utterance 
as a Buddha, he metamorphosed himself into a house 
complete with rafters and ridge-beam:
‘Builder, you’ve been seen! You shall never build a house 
again! 
All your rafters are broken! The ridge-pole shattered!
My mind is gone to nibbāna. This is the end of craving.’32
In that startling cry, the exposure of the buildercarpenter (taṇhā, or craving) literally guts his physical 
and conceptual privacy. It is the deconstruction of that 
roofed dwelling which is the Buddha’s first triumphant 
proclamation. Enlightenment, in other words, is 
metaphoric demolition. Whatever is constructed 
in imagery and language must simultaneously be 
deconstructed: an interminable two-way traffic 
without semantic resolution.
Such construction and deconstruction, he repeatedly 
warned, was no simple matter. On a different occasion 
Ānanda (who was of the warrior caste) told the Buddha 
(another Khattiya) how amazed he had been by a 
certain archer’s feats; and again worldly enthusiasm 
was immediately diverted to spiritual use. Shooting

55
HAROLD BEAVER
an arrow, the Buddha warned, that pierces a hair 
already ‘split seven times’ was as nothing compared 
to understanding and penetrating the ariyasacca (Four 
Noble Truths). In other words, if hitting a bull’s-eye on 
this scale of microscopic precision was inconceivable, 
it was still less taxing than the attainment of wisdom 
(paññā). And a verbal bull’s-eye, on that scale, must be 
out of the question. Whatever the text of the Dhamma’s 
proclamation, language in its rough equivocations 
and approximations must ultimately falter and prove 
inadequate.
*  *  *
Clear-eyed and rigorously analytical himself, the 
Buddha constantly goaded his disciples into a like 
rigour; and as often as not, Ānanda played the role of 
fall-guy. One day when he announced in his cheerful 
way that the doctrine of Paṭicca-Samuppāda (usually 
translated as ‘Conditioned Genesis’ or ‘Dependent 
Origination’), though profound, struck him as 
‘perfectly clear’ – and with what ease he had fathomed 
it – the Buddha, in exasperation, shook his head. 
Ānanda was simply not grasping the complexity of the 
doctrine, not penetrating it sufficiently. His mind was 
as muddled, the Buddha sighed, as ‘a snarled skein of 
yarn’ or a mildewed old bird’s nest.33 Not just Ānanda’s, 
of course; such knotted, blighted tangles proliferated 
everywhere! The Buddha’s task must be understood as

56
THE BROKEN GONG
one of disentangling this matted mess, deftly picking 
out thread from thread, unravelling, then rewinding, 
unbraiding and rebraiding logical patterns through the 
eighteen distinct stages, for example, which condition 
death, grief, pain and despair.
He made huge demands. Above all, the Buddha 
required a lucid mind controlled with logical, highspeed precision. In meditation, it was not enough 
merely to reflect upon the body; it had to be examined 
bit by bit: head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, 
flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, kidneys, heart ... through 
a long list of thirty-two items: ‘Just as if, bhikkhus, 
there were a bag with a hole at each end, full of various 
kinds of grain such as hill-paddy, red paddy, beans, 
cow-peas, millet and white husked rice ...’34 What would 
a farmer or merchant with sound eyes do with such a 
bag? Carefully open it, of course; examine it; reflect on 
the content, sorting hill-paddy from red paddy, husked 
rice from millet, etc.
It was this sorting process, this parcelling by 
analytical division and subdivision, on which the 
Buddha always insisted; and physical accountancy, by 
vivisection, was only one means. There was also the 
more abstract operation of deconstructing the body 
into its fields of solid extension (or earthly element), of 
fluid cohesion (or watery element), of thermal energy 
(or fiery element), and of mobile impetus (or airy 
element). Under this very different mode of scrutiny, 
the body itself would vanish. For it would no longer be

57
HAROLD BEAVER
the body that was in question, only the four primary 
elements (dhātu) which composed it. No matter where 
placed. No matter in what position. No matter what bits 
were mutilated or missing, only these four dhātu were 
now of concern; and in this kind of analysis, the Buddha 
asserted, the act of intellectual surgery, as it were, 
ultimately displaced the original: ‘Just as if, bhikkhus, 
a skilful butcher, or his apprentice, having slaughtered 
a cow and hacked it into pieces, should squat at a major 
crossroads,’ with only the various joints on display, no 
longer the carcass as a whole; ‘so the bhikkhu examines 
and reflects on his own body’.35
Such displacement was at once practical and 
linguistic, as R. G. Collingwood implied with an
identical simile:
 ‘A grammarian is not a kind of scientist studying the actual 
structure of language; he is a kind of butcher, converting 
it from organic tissue into marketable and edible joints. 
Language as it lives and grows no more consists of verbs, 
nouns, and so forth than animals as they live and grow 
consist of forehands, gammons, rump-steaks, and other 
joints.’36
For the Buddha, too, this constituted not only a point 
of grammar, but that of any analysis conducting 
piecemeal dissection.
*  *  *

58
THE BROKEN GONG
Language was the central crux. Nāmaṁ sabbaṁ 
addhabhavi: ‘Name has soiled everything,’ declared the 
Buddha.37* We must simply persevere in the effort of 
employing formulas to unmask the inherent instability 
of all formulas. Even the ‘body’, or ‘coarse (physical) 
self’, needs a constant, beady-eyed scrutiny; which 
even then is not transparently manifest, but only to 
be grasped by parables of trick bags punctured at 
either end or butchers at the crossroads. It is our job 
to use language as concisely and unpretentiously as 
possible. But a Dhamma wholly ‘free of patchwork’ – 
and paradoxically ‘signless’ – may be encountered only 
in the awareness and the self-scrutiny of meditation. 
Such means, the Buddha insisted, lie ever ready to hand. 
They lie mysteriously dormant, like lotus-seeds under 
mud, within ourselves: ‘Friends, I do proclaim that in 
this very fathom-long body, with its perceptions and 
consciousness, lies the world: the world’s arising, the 
world’s cessation and the path leading to the world’s 
cessation.’38
Whatever ambush of corporal suffering and death 
may await us, in this ‘fathom-long body’ too lurks 
the ‘intuitive wisdom’ enacted in the Parable of the 
Watersnake for silently mastering the Dhamma and 
testing it: 39
* Here, the more accurate translation by Bhikkhu Bodhi has ‘weighed 
down’ rather than ‘soiled’. (Ed.)

59
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Only to that extent, Ānanda, may one be born, or
grow old, or die, or pass from one state to another to be 
reborn, as any pathway survives for verbal expression; any 
pathway for terminology; any pathway for designations, 
and spheres of knowledge, and denotations for the 
conditions of existence.’40
The verbal nihilism is unflinching. Radix malorum 
est loquacitas. Conceptualizing and naming, with their 
attendant grammatical structures, must by whatever 
conceivable tactic be uncoupled and destabilized:
‘What is it that soils everything? 
What is it that nought else excels? 
What is that single thing to which 
Everything else diverts its course?
It’s name that has soiled everything; 
Nought else exists that excels name; 
Name – simply name – is that one thing 
Towards whose sway all else inclines.’41
Even viññāṇa – that is, the worldly consciousness 
ineradicably linked to nāma-rūpa* – is illusion and must 
make way for the unsullied and unqualified (anidassana): 
the ecstatic, radiant wisdom of the Arahant. 42 The 
collapse is mutual, as of a lean-to or stook of sheaves:
‘Just as if, friend, two bundles of reeds were stacked to 
support each other, even so worldly consciousness is 
* Nāma-rūpa, meaning literally ‘name and form’, represents both 
the immediate presence of an object, rūpa, in one of the six sensefields, and the way that that object is perceived, or conceptually
designated. (Ed.)

60
THE BROKEN GONG
dependent on name-and-form, and name-and-form is 
dependent on worldly consciousness ... But, friend, if one 
of those two bundles of reeds were to be pulled away, the 
other would fall down; or if the latter were pulled away, the 
former would fall down. Even so, friend, with the cessation 
of name-and-form, worldly consciousness ceases; with 
the cessation of worldly consciousness, name-and-form 
ceases; with the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense 
spheres cease ... Thus comes about the cessation of this 
entire mass of suffering.’43
For the crux of language, in the last resort, is solely 
a linguistic crunch. The ‘attempt to dislodge concepts 
at the purely intellectual level’ must inevitably lead 
‘to infinite regress in thought.’ 44 The Buddha, unlike 
Jacques Derrida, is not intent on leading us from 
aporia to aporia, or from cul-de-sac to cul-de-sac. Such 
indecipherable, circular mazes, he insists, are dictated 
by our own inexorable, egotistical cravings.
*  *  *
POSTSCRIPT: Some nine centuries later Buddhaghosa, 
in his commentary on the suttas, quoted this verse: 45
‘Two truths the Buddha (best of all who speak) declared: 
Conventional and ultimate; no third can be. 
Conventional signs are validated by their use.
Language of ultimate significance is true.
In terms of dhammas; thus the Lord, a Teacher who
Is skilled in this world’s speech, can use it and not lie’ .46

61
HAROLD BEAVER
The source is unknown; but clearly Buddhaghosa 
approved the distinction, traditional by his time, 
between conventional speech acts and the Buddha’s 
own infallible speech. Yes, conventional speech, as the 
Buddha had taught, was capable of nonsensical statements in reply to nonsensical questions and of relatively 
– at times grossly – misleading statements. But the 
Buddha himself, it was agreed, transcended such worldly 
speech; and the whole later exposition of his teaching 
was in terms of his absolute truths such as those of 
impersonality and impermanence (anattā and anicca).47
But what is it that validates such an ‘absolute’ or 
‘ultimate’ language? Can it be anything other than 
linguistic convention? The Buddha nowhere claimed a 
special status for a specialist vocabulary by experts; and, 
in any case, such a specialist vocabulary would still be 
validated by the usage of such experts. Transcendence 
(lokuttara) beyond worldly conditions must also 
logically be beyond worldly signs, only to be negatively 
denoted as ‘unborn’, ‘unmade’, ‘uncompounded’, etc. 
For the Buddha there neither was, nor could be, an 
absolute language; such a self-validating system of 
meaning in fact goes slap against the grain of the suttas. 
All views (diṭṭhi), all concepts (papañca ), all imaginings 
(maññanā), all idioms must ultimately self-destruct. 
That is surely why mona (silence) is pervasively and 
punningly associated with the muni (emancipated 
sage). ‘The muni’, it has been well said, ‘is silent not 
only when he does not speak; he is silent even when 
he does speak.’48 For nothing is grasped or rejected by

62
THE BROKEN GONG
him; he has shaken off every philosophical concept, 
every idiom, every term. Which may also help explain 
the Buddha’s own ironic poise: ‘Monks, I do not dispute 
with the world; it is the world that disputes with me.’49
The ultimate paradox of Buddhism, then, is its need 
to employ language to counter language, to marshal 
ideas to deny the validity of ideas, to exercise thought 
to deconstruct thought (whose end-point is the abrupt 
and riddling kōan of Rinzai Zen). All views (diṭṭhi), even 
the Right View (sammā-diṭṭhi ) of the Eightfold Path to 
liberation, are conceptual traps and must ultimately 
be discarded. ‘Where consciousness is signless 
(anidassanaṁ) ... there ‘name-and-form’ is wholly 
destroyed.’50 That is the message of the Parable of the 
Relays as well as of the Parable of the Raft: whatever 
is useful at one stage, be prepared to jettison at the 
next. Impermanence prevails in the end even over the 
formulations of the Dhamma. 51

2
Buddhism has always been hospitable to the fine arts. 
The Buddha himself had marked poetic talent and out 
of his selected sayings, which form the Dhammapada, 
a vivid picture emerges of northern India some 2,500 
years ago: of forests and streams, great boulders and 
lakes, with maybe a cowherd in the foreground by a 
poorly thatched cottage whose water-jars flank the 
door. In the forest, creepers are twining; monkeys 
bounding. In mid-stream, a ferryman leans against 
the current. Through the villages ox-carts trundle on 
their spoked wheels. Inside a hovel, someone is stirring 
bean-soup or lentils with a spoon. In the distant city, 
a silversmith is hammering; a chariot is being gilded; 
while the court is watching painted puppets dance 
on jointed limbs. Everywhere, as in a tapestry, bees 
are buzzing about sandalwood and rosebay, lotus and 
jasmine. That was the Buddha’s world. Like Jesus in his 
parables, he reflected it in all he said.

64
THE BROKEN GONG
This imaginative density, with its ceaseless 
production of analogies from everyday life, was only 
one, possibly even a minor, aspect of the Buddha’s 
mind whose most salient characteristic was a logical, 
analytic, rigorously systematic mode of thought with 
a penchant for mathematical groupings, listings, 
taxonomies and generic accountancies of all kinds. 
The Buddha was known as the Vibhajjavādi, ‘one whose 
way is analysis’; and the honorific Bhagavā, usually 
translated as ‘Exalted One’, may well derive from the 
root bhaj, meaning ‘to analyse or elaborate’. The title 
would then refer to the fact that during the forty-five 
years of his teaching, he undertook selflessly to analyse 
and elaborate the Dhamma. As he solemnly reiterated 
to a young Brahman student: ‘I am one who answers 
after analysing. I do not answer one-sidedly.’1
Certainly he was a master of analytical exposition, 
compression and persuasion; a Sherlock Holmes of 
cause and effect; a psychological pioneer dissecting 
the constituencies of the mind: in short, more of a 
pragmatic Aristotelean than a Platonic thinker. Yet, 
without the myth-making propensities of Plato, 
there is a Platonic poetic side. Nor was he alone in 
using imaginative devices. His disciples (Khemaka, 
for example, or Sāriputta) too could deploy parables 
in testing situations. Though as we now read them, 
with their set repetitions and verbal recycling, they 
may well be marred by the formulaic nature of much 
of the expository text. To the Buddha as poet I shall 
return. Here, rather, I shall focus on the Buddha’s

65
HAROLD BEAVER
Socratic affinities: his teasing, quasi-forensic skill at 
cross-questioning in philosophical debate. Take this 
interrogation, from his sermon in the Deer Park at 
Isipatāna (Sārnath), near Vārāṇasī (Benares), of the 
original group of five ascetics:
‘How do you conceive this, bhikkhus, is material form 
permanent or impermanent?’ 
 ‘Impermanent, Lord.’
‘Now what is impermanent, is that pleasant or unpleasant?’
‘Unpleasant, Lord.’
‘But is it fitting to regard what is impermanent, unpleasant 
and subject to change as: “This is mine, this is what I am, 
this is my self”?’
‘No, certainly not, Lord.’ Etc.2
Or take this more impromptu exchange with a 
distraught picnic party in a wood somewhere between 
Vārāṇasī and Gayā. The Buddha was resting at the foot 
of a tree, when young men burst in on him:
‘Lord, have you seen a woman about?’ 
‘What’s all this about a woman, young men?’
‘Thirty of us, Lord, came out here with our wives. But one 
chap being unmarried, a prostitute was brought along; 
and she’s run off with all our stuff while we were having a 
game ...’
‘Which do you think is better, young men: to track down a 
woman? Or to track down yourselves?’
One can imagine the double take, the astonished pause:

66
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Come to that, to track down ourselves, Lord, to explore 
ourselves.’
‘Well then, young men, sit down and I will teach you 
Dhamma ...’3
He was always adept at turning his immediate 
environment into a vast symbolic playground: as at 
Vesālī, when he took up a little dust on the tip of his 
fingernail and asked the monks, ‘Bhikkhus, which is 
greater, this speck of dust or this mighty earth?’; 4 or 
at Kosambi, ‘gathering up a handful’ of fallen leaves; 5 
or at Rājagaha, after the seven-year-old Rāhula had 
washed his feet. 6 The simplest household gesture 
evoked a spiritual dimension. His questions, like those 
of Socrates, often seem naïvely – even childishly – 
transparent, as if they were a simpleton’s notions to be 
humoured by some patently obvious response.
*  *  *
It was a learned age, much given to sophistry and 
unscrupulous sabotage in debate among all classes 
of men: warriors, Brahmans, householders, monks. 
They were clever and knew each other’s theories as 
a hair-splitting marksman knows archery. Once it 
got around that the monk Gotama was about to visit 
such and such a town or village, they’d conspire on a 
common questionnaire in advance: ‘If he is asked like 
this, he will answer like that, and so we shall refute 
his theory; but if he is asked like that, he will answer

67
HAROLD BEAVER
like this, and again we shall refute his theory.’ 7 Or his 
rivals might plan to pose a ‘two-horned question’, even 
feeding a princely stooge some subtle formula to trap 
the Buddha. One such question, proposed by Nigaṇṭha 
Nātaputta, ran: ‘Venerable sir, would a Tathāgata utter 
such a speech as would be unwelcome and disagreeable 
to others?’ ‘When the monk Gotama is posed this twohorned question by you, Prince,’ gloated the Jain, ‘he 
won’t be able to gulp it down or throw it up. It will 
stick, like an iron-spiked pod, in his throat.’8
But the Buddha, as often as not, turned the tables, 
using the standard dialectical ploy of sidestepping 
an awkward query by first posing a counter-query of 
his own. Again, when Jains, for example, deliberately 
contrived to trip him up by asking: ‘Which of the 
venerable ones is more a dweller in happiness, King 
Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha or the Venerable 
Gotama?’ the Buddha, promptly bypassing the issue like 
a chess-player making a blocking move, replied: ‘Well, 
then, reverend Jains, I shall ask you a counter-question 
on that very subject; you may reply to it as you please 
...’9 On another occasion, when asked whether he had 
worked out his debating points (‘If I’m asked like this, I 
shall answer like that’) as part of a deliberately planned 
strategy in advance, the answer was ‘No.’ The Buddha 
was an expert in Dhammadhātu (the elements of the 
Dhamma) as his questioner no doubt was an expert in 
the construction of a chariot. There was no need for 
elaborate homework: ‘the answer would occur to me 
immediately.’10

68
THE BROKEN GONG
It was all a matter of training. To an expert, answers 
were instinctive. But that ‘instinct’ was dependent on an 
arduous and skilful apprenticeship. Princes, especially, 
seemed to find such sustained mental discipline hard to 
grasp. So when asked by that incredulous prince, ‘Does 
the answer really occur to the Tathāgata on the spot?’ 
the Buddha – much as Socrates was to do – tackled him 
on his own terms:
‘Well then, Prince, I shall ask you a question in return. You 
may answer as you please. Tell me, are you skilled in the 
various parts of a chariot?’
‘Yes, Lord.’
‘If asked, “What is the name of this particular part?” would 
you have to reflect “If asked this, I shall answer that,” or 
would the answer occur to you on the spot?’
‘Since I’m a famous charioteer, Lord, and fully acquainted 
with every part of a chariot, the answer would occur to me 
on the spot.’
‘Even so, Prince, with the elements of the Dhamma. Since 
every element of the Dhamma is fully penetrated by the 
Tathāgata, the answer occurs to the Tathāgata on the spot.’
Similarly, when asked by Prince Bodhi how long it 
took to reach enlightenment (a popular question to 
this day), the Buddha at once adapted his approach 
to aristocratic pursuits: ‘As to that, Prince, I shall ask 
you a question in return ... Are you skilled in the art of 
wielding a goad while riding an elephant?’11

69
HAROLD BEAVER
*  *  *
A favourite set of questions put to peripatetic 
gurus was the Dasa Avyākatā vatthū, a catechism of ten 
‘indeterminate’, or ‘undeclared’, points: Is the world 
eternal? Or not eternal? Is the world finite? Or infinite? 
Is the life-principle (jīva) identical with the body? Or 
different from the body? Does a Tathāgata exist? Or not 
exist? Or both exist and not exist? Or neither exist nor 
not exist after death? These ten avyākatānī, arranged 
in dilemmas and quadrilemmas, seem ‘to have been 
popularly regarded as a valid ready-reckoner for 
evaluating’ any religious teacher; for, again and 
again, the Buddha had to evade being trapped by this 
agendum, sometimes refusing to reply, at other times 
with counterthrusts of his own. 12 But mostly he did so 
by a shift to practical problems and illustrations from 
everyday life.
A classic example occurs in the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta:
POṬṬHAPĀDA: ‘From other teachers I have learned a whole 
variety of views – that the world is eternal, that it’s not 
eternal, that the world is finite, that it’s infinite and so on. 
Which one do you say is true?’
THE BUDDHA: ‘This is not what I shall teach you.’
POṬṬHAPĀDA: ‘Why do you not talk about these matters?’
THE BUDDHA (preparing to begin his alms-round): 
‘Because they are of no use.’13
At all times he avoided theoretical speculation for its 
own sake, the overriding rule being: remain alert. The 
ultimate lesson: truth is simply what works.

70
THE BROKEN GONG
‘If by the past is meant what is true, what is fact, but 
doesn’t conduce to your good, about that the Tathāgata 
says nothing ... If by the present is meant what is true, what 
is fact, but doesn’t conduce to your good, about that the 
Tathāgata says nothing ... If by the future is meant what is 
true, what is fact, but doesn’t conduce to your good, about 
that the Tathāgata says nothing.’14
He would be called a pragmatist today; and the 
Theravāda and Zen traditions of Buddhism still insist 
that it makes little sense to talk about knowing apart 
from doing: belief is that upon which a man is prepared 
to act. Or as C. S. Peirce explained in 1893, Pragmatism 
‘is only an application of the sole principle of logic 
recommended by Jesus: “By their fruits ye shall know 
them.”’15 All pragmatists, whether Buddhists or latterday Americans, put the question of first and last things 
in parentheses, as it were, anticipating Wittgenstein’s 
celebrated dictum: ‘Whereof one may not [usefully] 
speak, thereof one should remain [decently] silent.’ 16 
For the Buddha, the religious life was irrelevant to 
dogmas of infinity or of eternity. For his disciples, the 
range of his mind was so impenetrable that pondering 
it could ‘lead only to insanity and distress’. 17 This was 
wise; for as John R. Searle has written: ‘It is inconsistent 
with what we ... know about the universe and our 
place in it to suppose that everything is knowable by 
us.’ There are bound to be limits to the knowledge of 
creatures that have evolved as we have. Dogs cannot 
understand quantum mechanics:

71
HAROLD BEAVER
‘the dog’s brain is simply not developed to that extent. And it 
is easy to imagine a being that is further developed along the 
same evolutionary progression than we are, that stands to us 
roughly as we stand to dogs ... This imaginary evolutionary 
product would conclude that though humans can understand 
quantum mechanics, there is a good deal that the human 
brain cannot grasp.’18
So an experimental pragmatism must remain the 
rule. As the Dalai Lama is fond of saying (it’s a favourite 
quotation, though not found in the Nikāyas): ‘You 
should not accept my teaching just out of respect for 
me, but you should analyse it, the way a goldsmith 
analyses gold by rubbing, cutting and melting.’ 19 
What alone can be assured to work are the Aryasacca, 
or Four Noble Truths; what obviously does not work 
is a wild goose-chase after the nature of Eternity, of 
Infinity, of Nāma-rūpa and of Immortality. In the words 
of the Abhidhamma, it’s ‘as if the Buddha stood on the 
edge of the shore and pointed out the ocean with his
open hand.’20
That is why, when staying at Kosambi in the Sisu 
Grove and gathering up that handful of fallen sisu 
leaves, the Buddha asked the assembly: ‘Which do you 
think are the more numerous, monks, this small handful 
of leaves or those in the whole grove?’ Respectfully, 
they replied: ‘Very few in number are the leaves you 
have taken up. Much greater in number are those in 
the whole grove.’ To which the Buddha responded:

72
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Even so, monks, much greater in number are those things 
I have discovered but not revealed. And why, monks, have 
I not revealed them? Because they are not concerned 
with profit; they do not conduce to the holy life, nor to 
aversion, to detachment, to cessation, to tranquillity, 
to comprehension, to wisdom, to nibbāna. That is why 
I have not revealed them. And what is it, monks, that I 
have revealed? Why, that this is suffering, this the origin 
of suffering, this the cessation of suffering, this the path 
leading to the cessation of suffering. And why did I re -
veal this alone? Because, monks, this is concerned with 
profit and is the beginning of the holy life; this conduces 
to aversion, detachment, cessation, tranquillity, comprehension, wisdom, nibbāna. Therefore, I revealed it.’ 21
On another occasion, in response to the usual 
probing questions, the Buddha began:
‘Suppose, Māluṇkyāputta, someone had been wounded 
by an arrow thickly smeared with poison and his friends 
and companions, relatives and kinsfolk, called for a 
surgeon; but he insisted: “I won’t have this arrow extracted 
till I know whether my assailant was of the warrior-noble 
caste, or the Brahman caste, or the agricultural caste, or 
the menial caste ...”’
and so on and on, enquiring after the archer’s name, 
his clan, his height, his complexion, his town or village, 
the precise details of his bow, his bowstring, his arrowshaft and feathering.
‘That man would die, Māluṇkyāputta, before discovering a 
single clue, a single item ... The religious life, Māluṇkyāputta, 
does not depend on the dogma that the world is eternal, or

73
HAROLD BEAVER
that the world is infinite or that body and soul are identical 
... And what, Māluṇkyāputta, have I elucidated? Suffering, 
the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering and 
the path leading to the cessation of suffering. And why? 
Because this does profit and is the beginning of the holy 
life (disenchantment, detachment, wisdom, nibbāna).’22
After attaining Enlightenment at the age of thirtyfive, Siddhattha Gotama had become a wanderer, one 
of the many celibate, mendicant teachers and sages – 
some of them women – footloose about northern India. 
Official halls were erected for their accommodation, 
such as the Hall in Queen Mallikā’s park at Sāvatthī, 
or the Gabled Pavilion put up by the Licchavi in the 
Great Wood on the outskirts of Vesālī, or the Wanderers’ Park, called the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, at Rājagaha. 
There the Paribbājaka (itinerant sages) could engage 
in philosophical repartee and public debate. Some 
wandered independently; others were leaders of a sect, 
or Sangha.23
The Buddha became leader of just such a Sangha, 
modelled on at least two older-established Sanghas: 
the Nigaṇṭhas (literally ‘Unfettered’), whom we now call 
Jains, and the Āyīvaka (literally ‘Men of the Livelihood’). 
Both came in for much Buddhist banter. The Jains 
particularly were ridiculed for their absurd fatalism.
A running gag:
QUESTION: ‘Why did the Nigaṇṭha enter an empty house 
and receive no alms-food – just bites from a dog?’
ANSWER: ‘Because it was fated that he enter the empty 
house, go without alms-food and be bitten by the dog.

74
THE BROKEN GONG
That’s why he entered in the first place, left empty-handed 
and was bitten ...’24
But the Āyīvaka were the target of rather more than 
jokes. They were vilified as ‘their mothers’ dead sons’.25 
The Buddha’s disciples were bitterly opposed not only 
to their dissipated conduct, but to their self-serving 
calculus (‘When a ball of string is thrown, it will fly as 
far as the length of string unravels’) which allowed for 
neither training, nor self-determination, nor scope for 
deliberate self-defilement or purification. 26 Of their 
teacher, Makkhali Gosāla, the Buddha declared:
‘I do not see another single person, apart from that 
foolish man Makkhali, who so practises for the misery and 
unhappiness of the multitude.’27
His own saffron-clad disciples of the Middle Way 
were not known as ‘Buddhists’ at first, but by his clanname, Sākyaputtīya samaṇas .28 Nor was he necessarily 
recognized as a ‘Buddha’. The King of Kosala, who had 
seen countless gurus come and go, put it like this:
KING PASENADI: ‘Now when I asked Purāṇa Kassapa, 
Makkhali Gosāla, Ajita Kesakambalin, Pakudha Kaccāyana, 
Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta whether 
they claimed to have discovered the supreme full 
enlightenment, they made no such claim. So how is this? 
For you, Master Gotama, are both young in years and newly 
gone forth into homelessness.’

75
HAROLD BEAVER
THE BUDDHA: ‘Great king, there are four things that should 
not be despised because they are young. What are these 
four? A noble warrior, a serpent, a fire and a bhikkhu.’29
The title, then, needed public apology. Usually, no 
doubt, he was known as ‘this monk Gotama, head of 
an order ... teacher of a group, a renowned and famous 
ford-maker.’30 That key endorsement, ‘ford-maker’, 
was never uniquely bestowed on the Buddha. It meant 
someone capable of leading others across the stream of 
saṃsāra to escape the vicious circle of birth and death; 
but the title was respectfully conferred on all holy men 
and sages, of whom the six listed by King Pasenadi 
were most commonly cited. Looking down from the 
palace of Opasādā at a stream of Brahmans making 
for a sacred grove where the Buddha was resting, the 
regent’s minister called him simply the ‘monk Gotama, 
the son of the Sakyans’.31
These Buddhists, as I shall continue to call them, 
also stayed in those official halls and public resthouses where they could regularly cross swords with 
opponents – lampooned as ‘Eel-wrigglers’ and ‘Hairsplitters’, that is, equivocators and sophists in the 
worst sense – ‘shattering by their wit the speculations 
of others’. 32 In their travels, wanderer would call on 
wanderer, or maybe on a learned Brahman or celebrated 
hermit resident in the neighbourhood; as, for example, 
Dīghanakha called on the Buddha, the Buddha called

76
THE BROKEN GONG
on Sakuludāyi, both Vekhanassa and Keniya called on 
the Buddha, and Potaliputta called on Samiddhi.33
Other contemporary Sanghas included MuṇḍaSāvaka, or ‘Disciples of the Shaveling’; Jaṭilakā, or ‘Those 
who wear their hair in braids’ (itinerant Brahmans); 
Aviruddhakā, or ‘The Friends’; and Gotamakā, or 
‘Followers of Gotama’, in all likelihood the more 
contemplative, ascetic order founded by the Buddha’s 
schismatic cousin Devadatta. 34 But all alike were 
mendicants (bhikkhus) and unfettered wanderers. 
All entered into the spirit of debate, challenging and 
questioning each other’s basic hypotheses and ‘theories 
as a hair-splitting marksman knows archery’ (in the 
current cliché).35
Rules for debate, called ‘debating on the basis of 
truth’, were punctilious – in principle at least, if not 
in observance. That’s why, for example, the Buddha 
insisted on an explicitly rule-governed contest when 
facing a Jain opponent. 36 These stipulations were set 
out clearly by the Venerable Udena under three heads:
‘If you agree with any statement of mine, then concede it.’
‘If you think any statement arguable, contest it.’
‘If you fail to grasp the meaning of any statement of 
mine, enquire further about it … That way there can be 
conversation between us.’37
These provisos were repeated word for word by his 
opponent, a Brahman. As in a wrestling or boxing match, 
such rituals were of more than formal significance. It 
was as if a score were being kept of points awarded,

77
HAROLD BEAVER
validating propositions agreed upon, propositions 
suspended in dispute, and their mutual clarification.
In the cut and thrust of debate four rhetorical 
ploys were recognized in confronting a challenger: 1. 
to answer without qualifications; 2. to answer after 
analysing the question; 3. to reply with a counterquestion; and 4. to set aside the question in silence. 
On one occasion, piqued by the report of a garbled 
exchange between a wanderer and one of his own 
bhikkhus, the Buddha indignantly burst out: ‘I don’t 
even know the wanderer by sight. How could there have 
been such a conversation? The wanderer Potaliputta’s 
question should have been answered after due analysis, 
but this misguided man Samiddhi answered it without 
qualifications.’38 The young bhikkhu had boobed; he’d 
let down the side; and the Buddha goes on to fume 
at ‘the foolish, thoughtless wanderers of other sects’ 
who won’t even ‘understand the Tathāgata’s great 
exposition of Kamma’.
*  *  *
Rules, however, did not always keep tempers in 
check. In the rough and tumble of philosophical debate 
passions were easily aroused. The suttas are filled 
with outbursts of hurt pride, intemperate boasting 
and heated exchanges. As the Kālāmas of Kesaputta 
anxiously testified: ‘Lord, some monks and Brahmans 
come to Kesaputta and expound only their own tenets,

78
THE BROKEN GONG
while they abuse and rend and censure and rail at the 
tenets of others ...’39 One Aggivessana, a self-promoting 
loudmouth, boasted of his power to deconstruct all 
arguments, no matter on what or by whom: ‘There’s 
not a samaṇa, not a Brahman, nor the guru of a sect, 
not even an Arahant – if that’s what he claims to be 
– who, once grilled by me word for word, speech by 
speech, wouldn’t tremble, wouldn’t stagger, wouldn’t 
drip sweat from under his armpits. Even a dumb post, 
tackled by me, would tremble, shake and stagger – let 
alone a human being!’40 A similar glee convulsed the Jain 
camp at the prospect of verbal sport with the Buddha. 
Upāli, for one, thought he had him cornered: ‘I shall 
drag the monk Gotama to and fro with arguments as a 
strong man seizes a shaggy ram by the hair and drags 
him about to and fro. I shall sieve him with arguments, 
I shall thump and shake him with arguments. Just as 
a sixty-year-old elephant frolics in the pool while 
washing, so I’ll have some fun, I fancy, washing the 
monk Gotama ...’41
Just listen to the heckling, the mutual upstaging 
of one monk by another, in the appropriately named 
Peacocks’ Sanctuary. Scene: Purāṇa Kassapa teaching 
Dhamma to several hundred disciples. Someone shouts 
out a question:
A RIVAL MONK: ‘Sir, don’t put that point to Purāṇa Kassapa. 
He hasn’t a clue on that score. We know the answer. Ask us 
that question. We can put you straight, sir.’ 
PURĀṆA KASSAPA (visibly upset, waving his arms): ‘Quiet, 
gentlemen, please! SHUT UP , WILL YOU? They’re asking 
me. I’ll take that one.’42

79
HAROLD BEAVER
General pandemonium while a disgruntled crowd 
barges out, slanging each other, the speaker, anyone 
in sight:
‘You don’t know the first thing about this Doctrine. Nor this 
whole Discipline for that matter.’
‘Of course, we know this Doctrine. And this Discipline. We 
know more about them than you’ll ever know.’
‘Rubbish! You’re practising all wrong.’
‘Wrong? It’s you who’re wrong. Our practice is OK.’
‘Your practice is all wrong, I tell you.’
‘Nonsense! You’re gibbering ...’
‘You’re not only inconsistent, you’re incoherent. Your ideas 
are all screwed up. For all your homework – admit it! – 
I’ve got you scared. I’ve got you on the run. I’ve exposed 
your rotten arguments and refuted them till you’re utterly 
routed. Try wriggling out of that if you can.’43
Such gatherings, of course, could easily degenerate 
into a roughhouse. Not only holy men were attracted 
to the wandering life. The Udāna relates a notorious 
affair where wanderers murdered a wandering nun and 
buried her corpse in the ditch surrounding Jeta’s Grove 
(the park, that is, which the merchant Anāthapiṇḍika 
had donated to the Buddha for his Sangha). They 
then accused the Buddhist bhikkhus of raping and 
murdering her.44
*  *  *
Let us return to Aggivessana (his clan-name), also 
known as Saccaka. In the ‘Hall with the Peaked Roof in

80
THE BROKEN GONG
the Great Wood’ at Vesālī, heroic boasting abounded; 
gossip buzzed; quarrels escalated as busybodies slipped 
from clamorous group to group. It was an arena of 
frantic competition, an ideological marketplace with 
rival wares noisily hawked on every side. Such sparring 
provided a popular spectator-sport: now rapiersharp and swift; now warily circling one another like 
wrestlers. From the initial protocol confirming the 
terms of debate, to one man’s humiliation and downfall, 
was public theatre.
Picking a quarrel was simple. Saccaka, a Jain, casually 
intercepted a Sākyaputtīya samaṇa on his alms-round, 
elicited a sample of Buddhist teaching from him, then 
brazenly issued this challenge: ‘If that’s what the monk 
Gotama asserts, it is surely ill-conceived. Now what 
if we were to confront Master Gotama sometime or 
other and converse with him? Suppose we were to 
help extricate him from such a pernicious view?’ 45 The 
Buddha was not rising to the bait, however, so the Jain 
was forced to seek him out. First, with much provocative 
banter, he asked five hundred Licchavis – at Vesālī on 
parliamentary business – to come along to watch the 
fun; and so tickled were they at the prospect that they 
began calculating the odds on the spot, arguing about 
who was most likely to be refuted by whom and how. 
After due inquiries at the Hall, the whole troop set off 
into the jungle where the Buddha was sitting crosslegged, meditating at the foot of a tree.
So there they found him. Around the roots of the great 
sāla, or banyan, soon circles within circles of onlookers

81
HAROLD BEAVER
enveloped the two contestants. Saccaka decorously 
opened proceedings: ‘I would question Master Gotama 
on a certain point, if Master Gotama would grant me the 
favour of an answer to that question.’ And the Buddha 
graciously accepted, addressing him by his clan-name: 
‘Ask what you like, Aggivessana.’ But it soon became 
apparent that Saccaka had met his match. In the very 
first round he was pulled up short. Confounded, he was 
silenced. Silenced, he was shamed. Shamed, he was 
knotted in self-contradiction after self-contradiction 
until at last the Buddha sardonically intervened: ‘So, 
Aggivessana, when you are pressed and questioned and 
cross-questioned by me, you are exposed as blundering 
and empty-headed. Yet in Vesālī you proclaimed: “I 
see no one – neither monk, nor Brahman, nor head of 
a Sangha, nor teacher of a sect, whatever his claims 
to Full Enlightenment – who would not shiver and 
tremble and sweat under the armpits on being engaged 
in argument with me. Even a senseless post would 
shiver and tremble!” Look, here are drops of sweat 
on your forehead; they’ve even soaked through your 
upper robe and dripped to the ground. But there’s not 
one drop of sweat on me!’
This cannot be gloating exactly; a Buddha can hardly 
be supposed to gloat over his opponent. Yet he even 
slipped off his robe at this climax to expose his torso, 
like a victorious athlete, to the crowd: ‘And the Blessed 
One uncovered his golden-skinned body before the 
assembly while Saccaka sat gloomily by, his shoulders 
slouched and head drooping.’ As well he might; these

82
THE BROKEN GONG
epic encounters were still marked with a certain 
flash bravado. For the fans at least, a touch of vicious 
exuberance was clearly essential to the sport. As this 
summing-up from one Licchavi supporter makes clear:
‘Picture some village children paddling in their local 
pond, who come across a crab and pull it out on to dry 
land; and as soon as the crab extends a claw, watch them 
smash it with sticks till all its claws are snapped and it 
can’t stir. That’s how all Saccaka’s lies and smears have 
been smashed by the Blessed One to teach him to keep 
his distance.’
The Jain must have raised his head by this time; for 
he gruffly turned on the Licchavi, warning him to shut 
up and mind his own business. Not until after a further 
round of questioning and exposition did he finally 
concede: 
‘A man might with more impunity attack a mad elephant 
than Master Gotama. A man might with more impunity 
attack a blazing fire than Master Gotama. A man might 
with more impunity attack a venomous snake than Master 
Gotama.’
Which marked the formal capitulation. But before the 
gathering dispersed, there was a show of reconciliation, 
as courtesy required, with the Jain inviting the 
Buddha together with all his bhikkhus to a meal the
following day.
*  *  *

83
HAROLD BEAVER
This was no isolated instance. The suttas leave a 
trace of many other such wanderers: the boisterous 
gang attending Sandaka in his cave, for example, or 
the free-for-all of Nīgrodha’s three-thousand-strong 
band, more agog for gossip, it seems, than dialectical 
give-and-take.46 Incoherent chatter of their kind was 
rhetorically standardized into a mix of twenty-seven 
particulars: ‘talk of kings, of robbers, of ministers, of 
armies, of alarms, of war, of food, of drink, of clothing, of 
beds, of garlands, of perfumes, of relatives, of vehicles, 
of villages, of towns, of cities, of countries, of women, 
of heroes, of street-and-well gossip, of the departed, 
of trifles, of speculation on the origin of the world, on 
the origin of the sea, and whether things are or are 
not’ – of which only the last three could conceivably 
be judged apposite. But it was precisely this group 
that was critical of the lack of open debate in the
Buddha’s circle:
‘Now look, householder, do you know with whom the 
ascetic Gotama talks? With whom he holds conversation? 
With whom he exchanges the cut and thrust of debate 
to attain wise judgment? The ascetic Gotama’s insight is 
ruined by his habit of seclusion. He’s not comfortable in 
conducting an assembly. He’s not quick in argument. He’s 
concerned only with fringe discussions. Like a one-eyed 
cow walking in a circle, the ascetic Gotama pursues only 
the outer circumference of relevant issues. Why, if the 
ascetic Gotama were to visit this assembly, we could floor 
him with a single question. Yes, sir, we’d roll him over like 
an empty pot!’47

84
THE BROKEN GONG
More specifically, the Buddha was accused of 
nihilism, a charge to which he was vulnerable because 
of his simultaneously held (and paradoxical) doctrines 
of selflessness (anattā) and of rebirth.
The charge of nihilism the Buddha robustly refuted:
‘Since I am not a nihilist and do not teach annihilationism, I 
have been falsely accused, without a shred of justification, 
by some samaṇas and Brahmans ... I teach now what I have 
always taught: of suffering and the cessation of suffering.’48
The more general charge that he was not selfassertive enough, and even avoided public debate, was 
in part conceded when he declared to his disciples: ‘I 
do not dispute with the world, bhikkhus; the world 
disputes with me.’ Openly challenged, as in the Saccaka 
incident, he inevitably held his ground. But did he ever 
initiate such a challenge? Did he ever deliberately go 
on the warpath? That was apparently not his style, 
nor did he publicly strive to upstage leaders of other 
sects. Though he certainly ran them down, laid into 
the most objectionable types among them, such as 
Makkhali Gosāla, and repeatedly categorized their 
various shortcomings. Others, like Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta 
(Mahāvīra), might claim to be ‘All-knowing’ and ‘Allseeing’,49 but the Buddha rejected such grandiose titles, 
claiming only the Tevijjā, as he called it, or ‘Genuine 
Triple Knowledge’: knowledge of his own past lives, 
knowledge of his present liberation and knowledge of 
future rebirths for all mankind according to the law of 
kamma.50 Which seems omniscient enough.

85
HAROLD BEAVER
Nor is it entirely true to assert that the Buddha never 
raised his voice in the hubbub of competitive doctrines, 
which inevitably overlapped despite each aspiring 
to a unique integrity. Only his disciples, he claimed, 
were open-eyed; the wanderers of all other sects, he 
charged, were ‘blindly ignorant of health and unseeing 
of nibbāna’.51 What he called his Lion’s Roar (sīhanāda ) 
was invariably aimed at unbelievers: ‘Bhikkhus, only 
here is there a monk, only here a second monk, only 
here a third monk, only here a fourth monk. The 
doctrines of others are devoid of monks: that’s how to 
roar an authentic Lion’s Roar.’52
Such claims cannot have made for easy fellowship 
on the road or in the great hall at Vesālī. The oneupmanship was too intense. In mid-debate, an ebullient 
rival group once jammed the Buddha’s account of 
transcendental meditation by thumping out the 
refrain: ‘We won’t renounce our teacher’s claims for 
that! We won’t renounce our teacher’s claims for that! 
We won’t renounce our teacher’s claims for that!’53
A more extensive roar (the Kassapa-Sīhanāda  Sutta) 
was aimed, yet again it would seem, at the Jains. It was 
the Buddha’s fiercest counter-attack to the charge that 
he sequestered himself, not having the guts to face the 
competition. The broadside is cumulative, building 
up by exasperated repetition, on the principle of ‘The 
House That Jack Built’.

86
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Kassapa, it may be that wanderers of other sects will 
say: “The ascetic Gotama roars his Lion’s Roar, but only
in empty places, not in company.” They should be told
that this is not true: “The ascetic Gotama roars his Lion’s 
Roar in company.” Or they may say: “The ascetic Gotama 
roars his Lion’s Roar in company, but without confidence.” 
They should be told that this is not true: “The ascetic 
Gotama roars his Lion’s Roar in company and confidently.” 
Or they may say: “The ascetic Gotama roars his Lion’s Roar 
in company, and confidently, but they do not question 
him.” They should be told that this is not true: “The ascetic 
Gotama roars his Lion’s roar in company, and confidently, 
and they do question him.” Or they may say: “The ascetic 
Gotama roars his Lion’s Roar in company, and confidently, 
and they do question him, but he doesn’t answer ... but 
he doesn’t win them over with his answers ... but they 
don’t find them pleasing ... but they’re not satisfied with 
what they’ve heard ... but they don’t behave as if they 
were satisfied ... but they’re not on the path of truth ... but 
they’re not satisfied with the practice.” 
They should be told that this is not true: “The ascetic 
Gotama roars his Lion’s Roar in company, and confidently, 
and they do question him, and he does answer and win 
them over with his answers, and they find it pleasing, and 
they are satisfied with what they’ve heard, and behave as 
if they’re satisfied, and they are on the path of truth, and 
they are satisfied with the practice.”’54

87
HAROLD BEAVER
The longest, most sustained assertion of his 
transcendent status as Tathāgata was prompted by a 
disrobed monk who had mocked his teaching before 
the Vesālī Assembly. This ex-monk, Sunakkhatta, had 
trashed him as a mere rationalist, teaching ‘a Dhamma 
hammered out by human thought, following his own 
line of enquiry as it occurred to him.’ The ‘Greater Lion’s 
Roar’ (Mahāsīhanāda Sutta) is an old man’s justification 
of his life’s achievements, an enumeration of his still 
potent powers, and an autobiographical flashback to 
those fakir days before his Enlightenment. 55 Though 
by then in his seventies, twelve times he claimed pride 
of place, ‘roaring his Lion’s Roar in the assemblies and 
setting the Divine Wheel rolling forward’. This defiant 
Apologia Pro Vita Sua concludes with unwavering faith 
in his own perspicacity:
‘even if you have to carry me about on a litter, still there will 
be no change in the lucidity of the Tathāgata.’
*  *  *
Greeks, no doubt, would have called him a 
‘gymnosophist’, recognizing something familiar in 
his insistence on the Middle Way (Majjhimapaṭipadā ): 
avoiding both extremes of his luxurious life as a 
prince and of his self-mortification as a fakir; neither 
too elaborate in his practices, nor too grimly ascetic; 
neither too indulgent in pleasure, nor too preoccupied 
with pain; neither too lax, nor too uptight; neither 
oversuperstitious, nor over-sceptical; but steering a

88
THE BROKEN GONG
path which skirted both infatuation with desire (taṇhā) 
and collapse into despair (dukkha) in their continuous 
cycles of happiness and unhappiness. Equally apt would 
have sounded his parable of the lute-strings.
Soṇa Kolivisa was a wealthy merchant’s son, recently 
recruited into the Sangha and still tense with nervous 
energy. All day he would pace to and fro on blistered 
feet until his path was stained with blood, pondering 
how to rid himself of his family wealth. But the Buddha, 
reading his thoughts, asked him:
‘When you were at home as a layman, Soṇa, didn’t you 
excel at the lute?’
‘Yes, Lord.’
 ‘When your lute-strings were too taut, did it resound as it 
should?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘When your lute-strings were too slack, did it resound as 
it should?’
‘No, Lord.’
 ‘But when your lute-strings were neither too taut nor too 
slack, being evenly tuned, then the resonance was just 
right, wasn’t it?’
‘It was so, Lord.’
‘Even so, Soṇa, an excess of zeal leads to self-exaltation 
and a lack of zeal to indolence. Therefore resolve on an 
evenness of energy. Master your faculties in harmony. 
Make that your aim.’56
That was how we ought to live, the Buddha taught: 
with moderation and discretion in all things. Σωροσυ 
′νη η in Greek; for that, too, was the Hellenic ideal. Like

89
HAROLD BEAVER
Socrates, the Buddha believed that virtue was really 
knowledge: knowledge of what was good or beneficial 
for oneself; and so the ability to make the right choice 
in a shifting variety of circumstances.
Essentially it was a kind of prudence, like being a 
safe driver or following a sensible diet. The Buddha’s 
insistence on a skilful life – akin to a goldsmith’s, or 
a carpenter’s, or a horse-trainer’s skill – was matched 
by the Socratic fascination with craftsmen and their 
crafts. Both emphasized what was profitable (kusala) as 
opposed to what was unprofitable (akusala ); and moral 
weakness implied going against one’s training and 
better judgment. In theory, impossible.
This moral skill, then, was all one needed for the good 
life. No additional virtues of, say, courage or patience 
or temperance, it seems, were required. Simple wisdom 
that recognized the discreet choice along the right 
path was all-sufficient. Bad actions – that is, wrong 
choices – could only result from ignorance (avijjā). 
No evil-doer, even one as monstrous as Angulimāla, 
should be considered a voluntary agent in his crime. 
What neither the Buddha nor Socrates seemed willing 
to grant was the possibility of ἀκρασι (or ἀκρα′τεια), a 
weakness of will or want of self-control.57
To that extent they were both Pelagians, while we are 
more likely to be instinctive Augustinians. Pelagius was 
that Irish holy innocent who argued that anyone with 
free will would choose good rather than evil; while St. 
Augustine, following Aristotle, acknowledged, from his 
own youth, that the mind could harbour contradictory

90
THE BROKEN GONG
impulses simultaneously. Which was the dilemma 
Ovid’s Medea, long ago, had painfully recognized:
‘Video meliora, proboque; 
Deteriora sequor.’ 58*
As her Freudian heirs, we even claim to have 
uncovered both these conscious drives and unconscious 
or semi-conscious fixations. There is such a thing as a 
vicious streak of cruelty. One may take sadistic pleasure 
in inflicting harassment or pain on others as well as 
on oneself.59 There are phenomena, for which we now 
have names and clinical descriptions, which Socrates, 
if not the Buddha, steadfastly ignored. There are also 
pathological obsessions and compulsions, pulling one 
against all one’s better judgments and resolutions to a 
rendez-vous with sex, or drugs, or alcohol. Edgar Allan 
Poe’s ‘The Imp of the Perverse’ was an early classic of 
such neurotic instability.60
The Buddha’s very title signified the Enlightened 
One, the ‘one who was awake’. But Socrates made 
no such claim for all-competent knowledge, for 
supreme wisdom. He was confident only in the logic 
of his argument, being totally committed to crossquestioning and debate (the Socratic ′ε′λεγχος) 
between seriously engaged interlocutors. 61 But what 
was meant by ‘beneficial for oneself’? Was it being 
virtuous for virtuousness’ sake? Courageous for the 
sake of courage? Or wise for wisdom’s sake? There was 
* ‘I see the better course and approve of it, but take the worse.’ (Ed.)

91
HAROLD BEAVER
always, surely, some further end already anticipated 
by desire. An end called ‘happiness’. Supreme wisdom, 
then, was a calculus of desire based on the happinessprinciple. It was a skill or craft, like carpentry or 
cobbling, whose final product, or final good, was 
perfect bliss. Virtue was the art of making oneself 
happy. Wrongdoers, of course, wanted happiness too; 
only they were mistaken about the means, calculated 
foolishly and were ultimately ignorant, or misguided, 
rather than vicious. They needed help. They needed 
patient correction, not retribution or punishment.62
The Buddha reduced this correction to five basic 
precepts: never to kill, never to steal, never to lie, 
never to indulge in mind-intoxicating substances, 
never to engage in sex against another’s will. 63 All 
exemplifications (as Jains had long recognized) of the 
principle of non-violence, or avihiṃsā, which entailed 
never inflicting harm on others or oneself. As the 
Buddha exhorted his seven-year-old son Rahula, 
pointing to a mirror:
‘What’s a mirror for, do you think, Rahula?’
‘For the sake of its reflection, sir.’64
‘So remember, Rahula, only after continual reflection, 
should an act be performed; only after continual reflection 
should an assertion be made; only after continual 
reflection, should a decision be reached. Now whatever 
physical, or verbal, or mental action you wish to perform, 
first reflect: “Is what I wish to do (or am doing, or have done) 
conducive to my own harm, or to the harm of others, or to 
that of both? If so, it is an unskilful act since it will entail 
suffering and be productive of pain.”’

92
THE BROKEN GONG
So ran the Buddha’s calculus. It, too, was based on an 
ultimate happiness-principle, called in this case the 
supreme bliss of nibbāna.
*  *  *
But what do we mean by ‘virtue’? Do we mean, 
broadly speaking, an instrumental skill? Is that what 
the Buddha usually meant? Or Socrates? The evidence 
hardly suggests so. The Buddha, in his statistical way, 
compiled a list of precisely ten perfections (pāramī ). 
These are: nekkāma, ‘renunciation’; sīla, ‘restraint’ or 
‘self-control’; dāna, ‘generosity’; upekkhā, ‘equanimity’; 
addhiṭṭhāna, ‘determination’; paññā, ‘wisdom’; viriya, 
‘effort’; sacca, ‘honesty’ or ‘truthfulness’; khanti, 
‘tolerance’ or ‘patience’; and mettā, ‘loving-kindness’. 
Of this list, ‘self-control’, ‘wisdom’, ‘truthfulness’ 
and possibly ‘renunciation’ could all be viewed as 
conducive to innocence, in its root sense of ‘innocuous’, 
or non-harmful. But ‘equanimity’, ‘determination’, 
‘effort’, ‘tolerance’, and above all ‘generosity’ and 
‘loving-kindness’, seem more typical of virtues pure 
and simple. Indeed, they are key elements of what 
Buddhists know as the Four Holy States (Brahmavihāra) 
forming the incontrovertible base of the ideal life: 
mettā, affectionate kindness to all; karuṇā, compassion 
for the sufferings of all; muditā, joy in the good of all; 
and upekkhā, without resentment, forgiving the faults 
of all.65 Centuries later, in the Mahayāna tradition, they

93
HAROLD BEAVER
contributed to the formation of the Bodhisattva as a 
Suffering Servant, far removed from any utilitarian 
calculus.
As to Socrates, what he ultimately thought is even 
less clear because of Plato’s progressive revisionism. 
His testimony on accepting the death sentence from 
his fellow-citizens, at any rate, sounds unambiguous: 
‘No evil can befall a good man either in life or in 
death.’66 By which he cannot simply have meant a ‘wise 
man’; he must have meant what we mean by a ‘virtuous 
man’. At the very least, wisdom and virtue had become 
inseparable in a life correctly lived.67
So the problem of virtue remained, in some sense, 
unresolved. Plato, in his ideal state of The Republic, 
appended a vast annex to Socratic teaching by an 
elaborate programme for the education or training of 
desire. The Buddha’s programme had been founded 
on the discipline of meditation, as his social education 
had been centred on the community of bhikkhus. The 
Sangha, it could be argued, was his ideal republic whose 
constitutional guide is derived, to this day, from the 
five books of the Vinaya. Both Plato and the Buddha, 
too, believed in some variant of metempsychosis, 
though Plato’s Theory of Forms (comprehended by 
innate faculties to which we have access by jolts of 
recollection) and his belief in the pre-existence of 
the soul were doctrinally interdependent, while the 
Buddha’s doctrine of rebirth never served as a trigger 
for reconstituting the essential Eightfold Path. 68 All in 
all, though, it is clear that the Buddha and even the

94
THE BROKEN GONG
Platonized Socrates shared much common ground; 
and from this point I shall adduce all aspects of 
Socrates, as transmitted to us, even his most Platonic 
characteristics.69
The question is: was the Buddha essentially a sophist 
– like Protagoras, say – a teacher of virtue, asking, ‘What 
is the good life?’ and ‘How does one successfully lead a 
good life?’ Or was he something more? To what extent 
can we talk of a Socratic Buddha? How explicit is the 
range of affinities between the Buddha and Socrates?
*  *  *
1. Both their methodologies, as we have seen, 
involved a barrage of personal enquiries, intimate 
cross-questioning, an insistence on dialectical analysis 
and logical coherence. ‘Pay attention, Aggivessana, pay 
attention how you reply,’ warned the Buddha. ‘What 
you said earlier does not tally with what you said later, 
or what you said later with what you said earlier.’ 70 
For self-knowledge lay at the core of both Hindu and 
Greek philosophical debate: Γν ϖ′ θι σεα′ ντον, as was 
inscribed over the gateway of the Delphic oracle. Any 
engagement with virtue had to begin with personal 
honesty. A consistent exercise in candid self-scrutiny 
was the necessary condition of moral insight: without 
truthfulness, no virtue; without virtue, no truthfulness.
The Buddha practised a wholly empirical, 
investigative approach, distrustful of all authority

95
HAROLD BEAVER
or tradition, communal piety or dogma, hearsay or 
conjecture, even of evidence derived solely from 
deductive or inductive proof. Always the emphasis 
lay on direct, private experiment. Circumstantial 
corroboration or mere hypothetical confirmation was 
never to be trusted. On spotting broad hoof-tracks, 
for example, alongside torn branches and scraped 
tree-trunks, never jump to the conclusion: ‘It’s a bull 
elephant! A huge one!’ They may, after all, be prints of 
a tall, tusked cow elephant. Only sighting a great bull 
‘at the root of a tree or in the open, walking about or 
standing, sitting or lying’ should convince you. 71 So 
much for deductive reasoning. But don’t tumble to the 
other extreme. Never smugly conclude: ‘This alone 
is true; anything else is false.’ Inductive arguments 
convince only up to a point: with the mental proviso that 
they amount to no foolproof ‘discovery of the truth’. 
Like Sir Karl Popper, that is, the Buddha allows for a 
perpetual possibility of falsification of any inductively 
inferred truth. The evidence must always remain 
inconclusive. A proposition, however well argued, may 
still be ‘hollow, empty and false’; another proposition, 
‘though badly argued, may still be factually correct’.72
The locus classicus  is his address to the people of 
Kesaputta, who had long been pestered by a variety of 
abusive sects. ‘You may be puzzled, Kālāmas,’ he began,
‘you may well be uncertain when it comes to religion. 
Doubt is rightly roused by such dubious matters. Come, 
Kālāmas, don’t be satisfied with something simply 
because you’ve practised it from ancient times; or simply

96
THE BROKEN GONG
because you’ve been taught it; or simply because it 
appears in legends; or simply from hearsay; or simply by 
inference or extrapolation; or simply through guesswork;
or simply through cogitation; or simply because it seems 
theoretically plausible; or simply out of respect for your 
teachers. But, Kālāmas, whenever you’ve confirmed 
for yourselves that certain ideas are unskilful and 
contemptible, leading to harm and suffering, then you 
should abandon them.’73
2. Both the Buddha and Socrates enjoyed dramatizing 
fictional situations to probe their psychological 
and moral import. ‘How do you conceive this ...?’ 
was the Buddha’s favourite line for buttonholing 
a visitor: ‘Suppose a man came here brandishing a 
sword ... Suppose some monk came here possessed of 
supernormal mastery of mind ...’ 74 Such predicaments 
were projected as hypothetical models for closeup scrutiny and verification. What was well said of 
Socrates applies equally to the Buddha:
‘Only natural, ordinary impulses engage his mind. A 
peasant talks like this; a woman, like that. His mouth is 
filled with nothing but coachmen, joiners, cobblers and 
masons. His inferences and similes are drawn from the 
most humble, most familiar human activities; everyone 
can understand him. From such gross materials one might 
never have guessed at the inherent splendour and nobility 
of his ideas ...’75
3. These graphic analogies shade naturally into the 
use of allegory: ‘Suppose, Anuruddha, a man set out 
on a journey and murderers leapt out on each side ...’

97
HAROLD BEAVER
Or, ‘Suppose a man seeking a hidden treasure found 
at once five hidden treasures ...’ Or, ‘Suppose a hunter suffocated a quail by gripping it too tightly in both 
hands ...’ Or, ‘Suppose he let it escape by holding on too 
loosely ...’ 76 Each multiplication of mini-dramas posts 
a warning. In this case: don’t be emotionally mocked, 
or lulled, by sudden alarms or sudden elation, anxious 
overexertion or sluggish inertia. Their applications, as 
I shall explore in Chapters 4 and 5, are literally bound -
less as allegory shades indistinguishably into parable. 
Which is which? Take the Platonic role of the philosopher-king as a navigator versed in the art of navigation, expert on reefs and currents, stars and winds. The 
Buddha used a similar image, though not in the context of a free-for-all rabble steering the ship of state.
Or take Plato’s famous Parable of the Cave whose 
world of shadows becomes the Buddha’s world of 
illusion (moha) in the land of the blind:
‘Imagine a man blind from birth who cannot tell dark from 
light, let alone make out blue, yellow, red or crimsoncoloured patches, distinguish rough from smooth surfaces 
(except by touch), or watch the moon and stars by night. 
He might well conclude: “There are no blue, yellow, red or 
crimson-coloured patches, no darker or lighter shapes, no 
rougher or smoother textures, no sun or moon or stars, nor 
anybody who can perceive them. For if I can’t see them, it 
follows that no one else can; and if no one’s aware of them, 
they can’t exist.” Would that be a sound line of inference? 
Would that seem a legitimate deduction?’
‘Far from it, Master Gotama. By so concluding, he would 
not be inferring correctly.’77

98
THE BROKEN GONG
Plato’s troglodytes must be forcibly twisted around 
towards the sun at the risk of blinding; for the Buddha, 
it is only by cutting off the ‘five cords of sensual desire’ 
that the inner eye may be open to transcendental vision 
within the eight jhānas (meditative trances).
4. Both the Buddha and Socrates, however, were 
wary of any explicit appeal to art. To this imaginative 
dilemma in the Buddha’s teaching I return in the next 
chapter. His anathema was total (the bhikkhu ‘abstains 
from dancing, singing, music and theatrical shows’, 
etc.78), while Plato in The Republic scarcely permitted 
his élite more: some narrative epic (as long as it was 
morally uplifting), a limited scope for pastoral and 
martial music, and for the rest ‘nothing but hymns 
to the gods and encomia for the good’. 79 Plato’s 
constitutional taboo was based on a triple argument: 
1. image-makers have ‘no understanding of what is’ 
(essence), ‘only of what appears’ (phenomenon); 2. 
image-making is nothing but a kind of replication or 
imitation (μι′μησις); and 3. only those handling, or 
in any sense testing, a product can assess its beauty: 
which is to say, its propriety. 80 Simulation, whether 
in painting or poetry, may be charming, but is bound 
to be unreliable and as unilluminating in its secondhand way as moonshine. (This was a pragmatic test the 
Buddha also applied, though not quite on these terms.)
5. For what is beyond appearance (phenomena) 
must, by definition, be beyond poetry and intelligible 
only to the philosopher. Or ‘seer’, as the Phaedrus
puts it:

99
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Now of that region beyond the sky no earthly bard has 
ever yet sung, or ever will sing, in worthy strains. But here 
is a sketch; for I must risk speaking the truth since truth 
is my theme. Real existence – colourless, formless and 
intangible, visible only to the intelligence which sits at the 
helm of the soul and with which the faculty of true science 
is concerned – has its abode in this region.’81
Likewise, the Englightened One, the ‘Kinsman of the 
Sun’, dissolved our corporal bodies to a mass of foam, 
feelings to a bubble, perceptions to a mirage, volitional 
acts to a banana-stem and consciousness to illusion. 82 
For the Buddhist, nibbāna lies beyond the world of 
signs, as the ‘Good’, in Platonic doctrine, lies beyond 
phenomenal existence, open only to intuition, not 
verification – and Buddhist meditation.
6. Both the Buddha and (the Platonic) Socrates, too, 
agreed that this ultimate ‘Good’ can only be realized in 
a cycle of repeated rebirths, or reincarnations, where 
a kind of law of just returns (the Buddhist kamma) 
operates. The Platonic schedule rules that if a soul ‘has 
seen more than others of essential Truth, it passes into 
the germ of a man who is to become a philosopher, 
or aesthete, or some votary of the Muses and of Love; 
if it be of second rank, it passes into the form of a 
constitutional ruler, soldier or natural leader ...’ and so 
to a third rank (politician, economist, merchant), fourth 
rank (gym coach or physician), fifth rank (soothsayer 
or mystic), sixth rank (poet ‘or some other imitative 
artist’), seventh rank (artisan or farmer), eighth rank 
(sophist or demagogue), to ninth rank (absolute

100
THE BROKEN GONG
monarch).83 The Buddhist Realm of Desire embraces a 
wider range from Hell-sprites to Hungry Ghosts, but its 
Mikado-like ‘let-the-punishment-fit-the-crime’ is less 
comically precise.
7. And what is the mark of true knowledge or 
wisdom? Right speech, right livelihood and above 
all right action are its mark: meeting injustice with 
justice, while preserving goodwill (mettā ) toward 
all. Philosophy, in its profoundest guise, vindicates 
itself in the life lived, in the control of the passions 
by reason and in the acceptance of death with noble 
indifference. True philosophers make dying their 
profession.84 Compare the Buddha, on the point of 
death, consoling his attendant Ānanda with Socrates’ 
cheerful composure, before drinking hemlock, with 
his friends. The Apology and the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta 
form two exemplary parallel texts.
*  *  *
An incontrovertible gulf, however, yawns between 
the Buddha and Socrates. Quite apart from yogic selfdiscipline, they differed in their roles as teachers, 
in their sexual permissiveness and in their whole 
relationship to society.85
Unlike the Buddha, Socrates was reluctant to claim 
that he had attained, or even grasped, the ultimate 
Truth, or Reality, or Good, to which he aspired. To the 
contrary, he gloried in his ignorance, merely proclaiming 
his passionate devotion to wisdom (φιλοσφι’α). The 
′

101
HAROLD BEAVER
very title ‘teacher’ was disowned. Far from mastering 
Truth, he was nothing but a midwife (μαια), he insisted; 
his skills were merely obstetric (μαιεντικός), befitting 
his humble, ancillary role. His sole purpose, that is, 
was to help others to a clearer awareness of concepts 
already latent in their minds.
Thus the pervasive irony; the repeated insistence 
on his stupidity – his hopeless and culpable naïvety – 
was in part a decoy, a dissimulation to encourage his 
more pretentious interlocutors to back into awkward 
self-contradiction.86 Even the great Parable of the Cave 
concludes with a coy gesture of self-depreciation: 
‘Whether it’s actually true, God knows. That’s just how 
it appears to me.’ For the art of Socratic irony consists 
of soliciting all comers with a sympathetic and puzzled 
complicity. Though such foolishness, no doubt, was 
sometimes more than a mere pose. There remained 
a genuine puzzlement and humility in the face of the 
human predicament for which intuitions and signs 
supplied some kind of inner assurance – what Jesuits 
call a réserve de conscience – beyond all play of irony. The 
duplicity was under reserve.
For, if not enlightened exactly, Socrates was the 
passive recipient of warning voices and of signs – 
what he called in the Apology, ‘the prophetic sign I’m 
used to receiving from the divine voice’ (δαιμόνιον), 
a ‘divine sign from God’, my ‘accustomed sign’. ‘Know 
well,’ he told his five hundred Athenian jurors, ‘God 
has commanded me to do so ...’ Though, just as often, 
intuitions thwarted and obstructed him ‘in quite small 
′

102
THE BROKEN GONG
matters’ should he be about to act improperly. His 
most constructive teaching, or mystic speculation, 
he adopted from an assumed voice, that of the wise 
Diotima, his source for the ultimate mysteries of love. 
She became his privileged seer or visionary bard. To her 
poetic myths he ascribed the heightened discourse of 
his most powerful revelations: as that of the charioteer 
of the soul (in the Phaedrus) or the daimon Eros, the 
sprite of Love (in the Symposium).
The Buddha, by contrast, was a self-proclaimed 
Tathāgata: ‘in the world Arahant and Fully 
Enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, 
sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of the 
submissible, teacher of gods and of men, awakened, 
blessed.’87 As Tathāgata, he never dissimulated, never 
egged on his interlocutors with a duplicitous smile. He 
harboured neither a Socratic nor Jesuitical reserve. He 
may have been crushingly sarcastic; he may, at times, 
have seemed close to jeering. But he was never ‘ironic’ 
in quite the Socratic way.
*  *  *
Simultaneously hunter and enchanter – yet subtle 
as a sophist – Love became the guiding force of the 
whole Platonic programme. For the lover of wisdom 
begins, in adolescence, as a romantic lover. ‘It is not 
easy,’ Socrates concluded Diotima’s discourse in the 
Symposium, ‘to find a better assistant than Love in 
seeking to communicate immortality to our human

103
HAROLD BEAVER
nature.’ But the Buddha condemned the very notion 
of such love; taṇhā (desire), kāma (physical desire), 
rāga (lust), kāmacchanda (longing for sexual pleasure) 
were the verifiable causes, in their frenetic turmoil, 
of all dukkha. For his monks, at least, there was no 
conceivable middle term between total chastity and 
unbridled lust. Licentious excess (ἀκολασι′α, in Greek) 
inevitably overwhelms the male.
The suttas proliferate nauseating images of lust 
as a deadening, vicious circle of dependency: in 
the figure of the leper, for example, scratching the 
scabs off his sores; 88 or in the unquenchable flames 
of the Fire Sermon. 89 For the sexual impulse, left 
unrestrained, is all-consuming: totally obsessive, 
debilitating, paralysing, destructive. Like a malignant 
cancer, sex is inevitably a killer; as in the Parable of the 
Māluva, a creeper invades a sound body, multiplying 
at its expense, only to overwhelm it. 90 The horror is 
contagious, the angst palpable. Chastity apart, all else 
is ‘vulgar lechery’.91
For the Greek, however, addiction to temporal 
beauty can also be coaxed to transcendent and 
immortal beauty, ascending from the transitory and 
multiple to the single, eternal, pure geometry of the 
Forms. For ultimately supreme beauty (το′κα′λον) and 
the supreme good (το′α′γαθον) are one; and it is the 
soul, quickened by desire, which attempts the upward 
ascent, much as the Hindu atman aspires, after many a 
cycle of rebirth, to achieve final moksha in the Universal 
Soul of Brahma. Which is precisely what the Buddha 
had rejected.

104
THE BROKEN GONG
Only once does a disciple of the Buddha approach the 
Platonic paradigm and that occurs, interestingly, when 
addressing a nun. Sister, Ānanda tells her, imagine a 
monk envying another monk his enlightenment and 
wondering how he too could achieve ‘deliverance of 
mind’; later that monk ‘relying on craving, abandons 
craving. It was on this account I said: “This body is born 
of craving. Relying on craving, one should abandon 
craving.”’92 So even in the suttas sexual desire and 
mental aspiration may be linked. But for the Buddha, 
human longing is incapable of being transposed to an 
inclination for the ‘Good’.
*  *  *
Unlike the Buddha, who meditated on mountaincrags or in jungle-thickets far from the madding crowd, 
Socrates hardly once left Athens, let alone Attica. 
Teased by Phaedrus on this score, he replied: ‘Now 
trees, you know, and fields won’t teach me anything, 
but men in the city will.’ That spreading plane-tree 
(site of the Phaedrus) was to be the exception that 
proved the Socratic rule; the bo-tree (pipal, or ficus 
religiosa), under which he achieved Enlightenment, 
became emblematic of the Buddha. Proof of the holy 
life was remote seclusion, since ‘no forms, sounds, 
odours, flavours’ teemed there for the senses to relish.93 
Monks would resort to ‘a tree-root, a rock, a ravine, a 
mountain-cave, a charnel-ground or a heap of straw.’94 
While wandering in open woodland, it was the sight of

105
HAROLD BEAVER
tree-roots – ‘quiet and undisturbed by voices ... where 
one could lie secluded in retreat’ – that reminded King 
Pasenadi of the Buddha.95
Each man’s relationship to his society, however, 
proved paradoxical. The Buddha, the real heretic 
who denied the existence of the soul and mocked the 
Brahmans’ sacred mantras and sacrifices, died, widely 
esteemed, at the ripe age of eighty; while Socrates, less 
than a century later, in the crisis of recrimination that 
followed the defeat of Athens in the Peloponnesian 
War, was condemned to death for heresy at the age of 
(roughly) seventy. The Buddha had wandered across 
India, from the Ganges to the Himalayas, in a rare 
interval of almost universal peace; Socrates, between 
the ages of thirty-eight and sixty-five, had lived behind 
the walls of Athens at a time of universal war.
The charges that Socrates taught new doctrines 
about life after death and preached new gods were 
both ludicrously inept. The central, unspoken issue 
was the unravelling of the whole tissue of society. 
It is as if Jacques Derrida today were charged with 
high treason for his deconstructive texts and their 
aporias. The Socratic dialectic seemed to threaten 
the permanence of everything. It bred a generation 
of sceptics, as Plato himself recognized, calling them 
young ‘puppies dragging about and pulling to pieces 
whatever happened to be near them.’96 The Buddha with 
his monastic foundation, on the other hand, effectively 
undermined Sakyan society and its ability to resist 
encroachment from the Kingdom of Kosala. Stirrings

106
THE BROKEN GONG
of disapproval had long been felt even in Magadha. 
‘The monk Gotama is creating childlessness and 
widowhood; he is breaking up families and obliterating 
the clans ...’ 97 must have been a familiar refrain. His 
own father, King Suddhodana, had grieved at the loss 
not only of his son, Siddhattha, but also of Siddhattha’s 
half-brother Nanda as well as of his grandson Rāhula 
(both of whom had joined the Sangha), protesting: 
‘Lord, it would be good if the venerable ones did not 
give the going-forth to children without their parents’ 
consent’ – a plea directed at unorthodox religious sects 
to this day.98 But the Buddha escaped, and continues to 
escape, all censure.
It was Plato, like the Buddha, who died at the age of 
eighty: in Athens, at a wedding-feast, transformed by 
death into a soaring swan.99

3
Plato’s dialogues have long been considered a unique 
literary experiment. Could the suttas be considered 
in like aesthetic terms? Put aside for a moment their 
oral origin. Forget their generally impromptu context. 
Overlook their obvious homiletic intent. Did the 
Buddha delight in the quick spontaneity of his own 
imagination? Did he consciously value such facility 
for its own sake? If so, what role did traditional poetry 
and folklore play in his teaching? Above all, how did he 
conceive the function of art?
The Parable of the Drum suggests several lines of 
enquiry:
‘Once upon a time, bhikkhus, the Dasārahas owned a 
summoning-drum. As this wooden drum began to split, 
the Dasārahas hammered in first one wedge, and then 
another, and another, until in time the original drumhead 
had altogether disappeared and nothing but the patched 
inlay remained.

108
THE BROKEN GONG
That, bhikkhus, is exactly what will happen one day to you. 
To the Tathāgata’s profound, transcendental discourses on 
the Void future bhikkhus will neither listen when they are 
recited, nor pay the slightest attention; they will neither set 
their hearts on ultimate wisdom, nor even consider what 
first needs to be learnt and mastered. But to mere strings 
of pretty words and phrases, assembled by strangers and 
their disciples – to such poetic effusions they will listen 
when recited; they will pay them the closest attention; 
they will set their hearts on memorizing them; they will 
consider such lore alone worth learning and mastering.’1
That drum is reminiscent of a silk stocking darned 
entirely with worsted. How could it still be called a silk 
stocking now that it was cobbled all over with wool? 
Or take the good ship Argo ‘of which the Argonauts 
gradually replaced each part’ on their voyage into the 
Black Sea, ‘so that they finally had a wholly new ship 
without having changed either its name or its form.’ 
Was it the identical ship, then, that returned to Greece 
from the land of the Scythians? Roland Barthes, for 
one, had no doubts. For him, the Argo was ‘an object 
whose only cause was its name; whose only identity, 
its form’; in short, an ‘eminently structured object’, as 
if form alone inevitably transcends its interchangeable 
and transient parts.2
This defence of nominal continuity, retained at the 
expense of every constituent element, can even be 
taken a step further. The Japanese Sun Goddess remains 
a constant numinous presence, Italo Calvino argued, 
despite the repeated demolition and reconstruction of

109
HAROLD BEAVER
her wooden shrine at Ise, just as poems survive through 
the centuries despite the repeated crumbling of their 
successive transcriptions in legible form.3 For him, too, 
continuity inhered permanently in the structure; and 
as the structure survives, so does the spirit.
The Buddha, too, by his choice of the drum image, 
can be viewed as a structuralist of a kind. That is, he 
was aware of the structuralist argument. The Dasāraha 
drum, like the rebuilt Argo or the shrine of the Sun 
Goddess at Ise, was an ‘eminently structured object’. But 
against Barthes and Calvino the Buddha would argue 
that in all these cases nothing remains but a name, a 
floating ‘signifier’ whose ‘signified’, with its recurrent 
substitutions, was forever shifting. What the Buddha 
chose to emphasize was their primal cause, the potent 
source at their origin. To the question, ‘Can there be 
a permanent, inviolable identity surviving beyond the 
mutability of all its several parts?’ his answer was a 
resounding ‘no’. Acutely aware of the imperceptible 
and constant shifting and wearing away of all things 
(anicca), he naturally would have no truck in any form 
– whether disguised as ‘self’, or ‘soul’ or this equally 
factitious drum-continuum – with such metaphysical 
conundrums.4 The authentic, original expression – the 
commanding boom of that summoning-drum – will 
have vanished.
*  *  *

110
THE BROKEN GONG
His prescience was equally sure: that his Dhamma, 
which was a seamless whole – ‘lovely in its beginning, 
lovely in its middle, and lovely in its ending, both in 
spirit and in letter’ – would bit by bit decay into a mere 
quilt, an ingenious and ornamental patchwork, by what 
the French call ‘bricolage’. What else could be said of 
the many varieties of Mahayāna with their kōans and 
mandalas and tantras? Or the admixture of Buddhism with 
Hinduism and animism so prevalent in Southeast Asia?
The Buddha’s main fear was that his teaching 
would fall into the hands of professional rhapsodes, 
particularly those who specialized in improvising on 
given religious themes at public gatherings (samajjas ) 
to celebrate a feast-day. These rhapsodes seem to have 
performed ballad-like sequences with speeches and 
dialogue in verse. Strung loosely on a non-metrical 
narrative framework, such sequences were called 
akkhānas, of which a surviving example may well 
be the final vagga (the Pārāyaṇa) of the Sutta Nipāta . 
The Buddha himself explicated its complex verses
on five occasions.
Some of the more dramatic scenes in the suttas may 
in fact utilize their techniques. Take that boastful Jain 
who had sworn to thump and shake the Buddha in 
debate, only to find himself speechless in the opening 
round. Having answered the Buddha’s initial question 
(on royal executive control) with far too much 
elaboration, recklessly expanding the political premise 
to oligarchic communities, he is caught off guard by 
the Buddha’s follow-up (on man’s executive control

111
HAROLD BEAVER
over his own body). The same question is put to him 
a second time, and yet a third time, but the Jain just 
sits there frozen, dried up, unable to manage a ‘yes’ or 
‘no’. Intellectually, he’s stuck, of course, desperately 
searching for a way out. But, because of his boisterous 
nature, he’s trapped in a far more damaging emotional 
impasse. What today we would call a psychological 
block. The text continues: ‘At the third time of asking, 
a thunder-wielding spirit, with an iron bolt through its 
head, blazed in the air above Saccaka, threatening to 
split his skull into seven pieces.5 The Blessed One saw the 
thunder-spirit and so did Saccaka, the Nigaṇṭha’s son.’6
Greek epic used similar visionary interventions to 
dramatize a hidden crisis. At the opening of the Iliad, 
for example, Achilles flares up in anger at his public 
humiliation by Agamemnon. His hand grips his swordhilt. The sword has already half slipped out of its 
scabbard when, for an instant, he seems to waver. For 
Athene has materialized to counsel and restrain him:
‘The goddess standing behind Peleus’ son caught him 
by the fair hair, appearing to him only, for no man of the 
others saw her. Achilleus in amazement turned about, 
and straightway knew Pallas Athene and the terrible eyes 
shining.’7
Achilles pours out his grievances to her; she 
patiently answers, until he snaps his sword back into 
its scabbard:
‘He spoke, and laid his heavy hand on the silver sword 
hilt and thrust the great blade back into the scabbard nor

112
THE BROKEN GONG
disobeyed the word of Athene. And she went back again to 
Olympos to the house of Zeus of the aegis with the other 
divinities.’
How long does that (18-line) altercation take? Like a carskid, it’s impossible to reckon. A split second is allowed 
to expand (whether presided over by calmly reasoning 
Athene or the blazing thunderbolt-spirit) into a 
visionary dimension before the text returns to public 
events in standard narrative time. It is an epic device, 
derived in this case no doubt from contemporary Hindu 
oral tradition. The sutta continues: ‘Then Saccaka was 
terrified, his hair stood up on end and, seeking refuge 
with the Buddha, he said: “Ask me, Master Gotama; I 
will answer.’’’ So the psychological spell is broken, the 
tension resolved, and the Jain can finally spill out his 
answer: ‘No, Master Gotama’.
Since the suttas rarely pitch the dramatic stakes 
quite so high, they seldom need to call on such a complex 
psychological device. But Saccaka’s character had been 
presented at such unusual length that his confrontation 
with the Buddha entailed this overwhelming rhetorical 
technique. His hubris and subsequent collapse must, in 
any case, have been reminiscent of similar bombastic 
encounters in the popular repertoire. Though chapter 
and verse are missing, it would be surprising if the 
composition of the suttas, in the form they have come 
down to us, had in no respect been influenced by the 
rhapsodic tradition.
*  *  *

113
HAROLD BEAVER
Just as drumheads wear thin, so texts become 
frayed, their vigour dissipated by the needs of 
commentary and translation. To that extent, the 
Buddha’s prophecy is self-evident and self-fulfilling. 
Instability of transmission in itself, however, has 
never invalidated his basic insights. Elaborations 
may have distorted, or disguised, or trivialized 
the Dhammaniyāna, but they could not extinguish 
it.8 Uppādā vā bhikkhave tathāgatānaṃ, anuppādā vā 
tathāgatānaṃ …: ‘Whether Buddhas arise or not, it is a 
natural, unchanging truth that all compounded things 
[saṇkhāra] are unenduring [anicca ], unstable [dukkha], 
and not-self [anattā ]’. The Dhamma is not concerned 
with identity. Its incontrovertible laws resist the 
very notion of patchwork. It takes precedence over 
terminology, over suttas, over interpretations whose 
haphazard formulations, with their various tropes and 
propositions and analyses, are themselves conditioned 
and determined by it. On the unbending nature of 
Truth, the Buddha takes his stand.
As in the following parable devised for the same 
blustering Saccaka:
‘Suppose someone in search of heartwood, Saccaka, 
spotting a tall, young banana shoot in the woods, decides 
to chop it down at the root. Having chopped it down with 
his axe, he proceeds to hack off the crown; having hacked 
off the crown, he unrolls the spirals of leaves without 
coming across a trace of softwood, let alone hardwood ...’9

114
THE BROKEN GONG
For the banana-tree is no tree at all, having neither 
bark nor wood. A vegetable, strictly speaking, it thrusts 
upward in a rolled sheaf from which the leaves unfurl. 
The top quality heartwood of which the Buddha 
must have been thinking was either that of teak or 
the Sāla tree (Shorea robusta), much used in Nepal, 
whose straight trunk grows to thirty metres in height. 
Elsewhere he graded even genuine hardwood, from 
the unreliable and unsound to the wholly sound and 
reliable, in a fivefold concentric cross-section: that is, 
from the boughs to the outer bark, to the inner bark, 
to the softwood, to the ringed core at the heart. So if 
anyone searching for heartwood chops off only boughs 
or bark or softwood to cart home, he’s wasting his time. 
His timber will not be sound; it will inevitably warp 
and buckle and collapse. ‘So whatever it was this good 
man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will
not be served.’10
In much the same terms, the wanderer Vacchagotta 
celebrates the pithiness of the Buddha’s teaching: ‘As 
a great Sāla tree is stripped, with the passing years, 
of its branches and foliage, its bark and sapwood, so 
this discourse of Master Gotama, divested of branches 
and foliage, bark and sapwood, consists purely of 
heartwood.’11 Which should be read, primarily, not as a 
compliment to the concision of the Buddha’s style, but 
to its unremitting concentration.
Now to return to Saccaka: the image of the Jain 
in that parable is the wild plantain or banana-tree, 
of course; the image of the Buddha, the heartwood.

115
HAROLD BEAVER
Banana stems are hollow; heartwood, dependably solid. 
For Buddhist texts, as this woodland lore proposes, 
are not modernist texts to be unpetalled leaf by leaf 
like a banana-frond, or a lettuce, without a kernel, 
without a node, without a defining core or axis. Truth 
is that axis and Dhamma, that heartwood, bound to 
survive as the assurance of ‘ultimate wisdom’ is always 
present. ‘There is no virtue even in many thousands of 
stanzas,’ the Buddha insisted. ‘A single line of a stanza 
which contains the Truth is better.’ Then he added a
single stanza:
‘Though ten times one hundred verses 
Are made up of meaningless lines, 
Better one line filled with meaning, 
By hearing which one is at peace.’12
That much is sure, though these concerns are implicit 
and not actively at issue in the Parable of the Drum.
*  *  *
Less clear is what the Buddha held to be the function 
and limits of art. After developing the elaborate image 
of the summoning-drum, he at once distanced himself 
from poetic discourse by characterizing it as ‘mere 
strings of pretty words and phrases’.
Mostly he responded to individual enquiries, 
expressing unprompted and unassuming needs. ‘If 
a bhikkhu has faith,’ he once remarked, ‘but does 
not approach me, then Dhamma-teaching does not 
occur to the Tathāgata. But if a bhikkhu has faith and

116
THE BROKEN GONG
approaches me, then Dhamma-teaching does occur 
to the Tathāgata.’ His own spontaneity, even then, 
depended on eight further provisos: the enquirer 
must personally attend on the Buddha; must question 
him; must listen to Dhamma with an attentive ear; 
must learn by heart the Dhamma he has heard; must 
examine the meaning of the teachings he has learned 
by heart; must understand the context and application 
of that Dhamma, by practising Dhamma according to 
the Dhamma; must enunciate distinctly and express 
himself courteously; must be one who can teach and 
encourage his fellow-monks by uplifting them with 
joy.13 In short, it had to be a participatory exercise, 
a spiritual tutorial. The Buddha either would, or 
could, only give such tutorials in a seriously engaged, 
cooperative context. The Dhamma was never for mere 
intellectual distraction, or curiosity, or entertainment.
The ideal was incision, precision, concision. Even 
when addressing large audiences, he ‘neither flattered 
nor berated that audience; he instructed, urged, roused 
and encouraged that audience with talk purely on the 
Dhamma’.14 He was suspicious of verbal display, of 
pretension, of bravura. His own voice (according to 
one Uttara, sent by a Brahman to spy on ‘the monk 
Gotama’) possessed eight qualities: it was ‘distinct, 
intelligible, melodious, audible, ringing, incisive, 
deep and sonorous’. 15 In others, such deep, melodious 
utterance might well have provoked a certain rhetorical 
self-indulgence counterchecked with theatrical self-

117
HAROLD BEAVER
restraint. Even the Buddha, on occasion, may have felt 
an actor’s urge.
Elsewhere he described his own self-composure 
when teaching like this:
‘I have had the experience of teaching the Dhamma to 
an assembly of many hundreds. Perhaps someone there 
may have fantasized: “The monk Gotama is preaching the 
Dhamma just for me!” That would have been a delusion. A 
Perfect One preaches the Dhamma to others only to impart 
wisdom. As soon as the talk is over, I steady my thinking 
within myself, quieten it down, bring it to singleness of 
focus, centring it on that same sign for concentration in 
which I constantly abide.’16
What he had to guard against, then, was being carried 
away by fine words, fine phrases, aesthetic pleasure of 
any kind as ends-in-themselves. As he recalled from 
his unenlightened days: ‘Elation arose in me; and 
owing to the elation, my concentration died away, the 
illumination faded and so did the vision of forms ...’ 17 
For one danger of a too fluent literary imagination is 
to be snared into self-conceit. This suggests why the 
Buddha was so resolutely opposed to a metrical version 
of his teachings, which two brothers called Yamelu 
and Tekula, monks from Sāvatthī, had once proposed: 
‘Lord, since the bhikkhus are born with various names, 
of various races, having “gone forth” from various 
clans, they corrupt the word of the Blessed One by 
transposing it into their own tongue. Let us render the 
words of the Buddha into classical metre.’18

118
THE BROKEN GONG
This, on the face of it, seems sensible enough. Metre 
is an age-old mnemonic device and, according to the 
suttas, was deployed on occasion impromptu by the 
Buddha himself. For example, when he capped six 
stanzas, addressed to him by the Brahman student 
Vāseṭṭha, with a further fifty-seven of his own; 19 or 
when he played variations (for another Brahman) on 
the set theme of whether sins could be bathed away in a 
supposedly holy river;20 or, when vexed at dissension in 
the Sangha, he extemporized a soliloquized rebuke in 
ten interlinked stanzas. 21 To excel in such improvised 
verse-debates at the time was a highly prized skill. The 
task of rendering the Buddha’s discourses permanently 
into metre, the two monks must have argued, would 
consolidate them into a universal, authentic and 
authorized text.
But, instead of encouragement, they found 
themselves roundly rebuked:
‘Misguided men, how can you say “Let us render the words 
of the Buddha into classical metre”? This will neither 
excite faith in the faithless nor increase faith in the faithful. 
Rather, it will perpetuate faithlessness in the faithless and 
endanger some of the faithful.’
After rebuking the two brothers and delivering a 
Dhamma talk, he turned to the Sangha thus: ‘Bhikkhus, 
the word of the Buddha is not to be rendered into 
classical metre. Whoever does so commits an offence 
of wrongdoing. But I permit each of you to memorize 
the words of the Buddha in his own tongue.’

119
HAROLD BEAVER
Perhaps the Buddha was alerted by the brothers’ 
stagey ‘fine voices and fine delivery’. A metrical text 
was bound to be a literary text. Once verse translation 
was admitted, poetic recitations were bound to follow. 
With poetic recitations, improvisation and all manner 
of exhibitionism could spontaneously flourish. Better 
a babel of tongues, better the Dhamma transacted 
in a hundred different dialects, than a Dhamma 
appropriated to art.
Whatever the target language, the Dhamma should 
never be converted into a mere literary exercise. Or 
some melodramatic variant of akkhānas. Of the four 
different kinds of poets distinguished in the Aṅguttara 
Nikāya – those creating imaginatively original work; 
secular as opposed to religious poets; improvisers on 
extempore topics (an art, as we have seen, at which 
the Buddha himself excelled); and traditional bards 
rehearsing and developing widely popular themes – 
it was clearly from the last that the Buddha had the 
most to fear. 22 (In a ninefold classification of Buddhist 
literature, such prose-and-verse mélange, as a genre, is 
called geyya.)
*  *  *
This still leaves the central problem only partially 
resolved: how does the Buddha square his own 
imaginative use of language with his rejection of 
figurative speech by ‘poets’? My conclusion on the 
Parable of the Drum is this: while suspicious of the

120
THE BROKEN GONG
attractions of poetry and the wiles of poets, the Buddha 
was not averse to a literary device, or literary stratagem, 
as long as it remained a supplement, an optional extra, 
an imaginative excess produced by the very thrust of 
the argument. With Emerson he would have agreed: 
‘The intellect is stimulated by the statement of truth 
in a trope and the will by clothing the laws of life in 
illusions. But the unities of Truth and of Right [of 
the Dhamma, in other words] are not broken by the 
disguise.’23 He was resolutely opposed (it follows) 
to any unconditional takeover of spiritual doctrine 
by rhapsodes and others, especially at the hands of 
‘outsiders’ intent on emending and refabricating his 
own texts. The pretence of aesthetic autonomy would 
have been dismissed as delusion.
The Buddha’s position becomes clearer if the 
contrast, implicit between his assessment of his own 
discourses and his conception of ‘poetry’, is fully 
spelled out. The contradistinction is fourfold:
1. The Buddha’s discourses are typified as 
‘profound’. Poetic discourse then, in apposition, must 
be deliberately concerned with superficial – that is, 
aesthetic – manifestations, ‘mere strings of pretty 
words and phrases’, calling attention to their own 
techniques and modes of utterance.
2. The Buddha’s discourses are typified as 
‘transcendental’. Poetic discourse then, in apposition, 
must delight in its response to empirical phenomena 
and demands of the senses, fashioning out of them (by 
a semblance of closure) a stay against confusion in a 
haphazard and transitory world.

121
HAROLD BEAVER
3. The Buddha’s discourses are typified as dealing 
with ‘the Void’. Poetic discourse then, in apposition, 
must be continually aspiring toward – without ever 
quite achieving – plenitude: the simultaneous grasp of 
both meaning and essence, as if the sole fulfilment of 
human experience lay in its expression.
4. The Buddha’s discourses are typified as setting 
‘hearts on ultimate wisdom’. Poetic discourse then, 
in apposition, must be viewed as a pursuit of an everreceding horizon, a mirage, a self-induced illusion.
Such is the implicit charge against art in its extreme 
predatory form, sometimes called (following Gautier) 
‘Art for Art’s Sake’. Just as Plato condemned poetry, 
among other things, for blasphemy – that is, lying 
about the gods – and outlawed the likes of Homer, 
Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides and Aristophanes from 
his ideal city, so the Buddha’s rejection of the imperial 
imagination was absolute.
*  *  *
The anathema runs: ‘He who imagines, bhikkhus, 
is bound by Māra; he who does not imagine is freed 
from the Evil One. If you say “I am,” what you really 
mean is “I am imagining.” If you say “I shall be,” what 
you really mean is “I shall be imagining.” If you say “I 
shall not be,” what you really mean is “I shall not be 
imagining.” Imagining what? That “I shall be embodied 
... I shall be formless ... I shall be conscious ... I shall 
be unconscious ... I shall be neither conscious nor

122
THE BROKEN GONG
unconscious ...” All that is imagining. The imagination, 
bhikkhus, is a disease; imagination is an abscess, a barb. 
That is why, bhikkhus, you must say: “With mind free 
from imaginings we shall abide.”’24
Yet commonplace skips of the imagination were 
certainly not disallowed. Take the occasion when 
Ānanda marvelled, in the Buddha’s presence, at how 
a certain sutta could be savoured again and again. 
‘Wherever he tasted, a monk would enjoy a sweet, 
delicious, unadulterated flavour’, he declared; and 
the Buddha accepted the compliment, suggesting 
that it might in future be called the ‘Honey-Ball’, 
or ‘Sweetmeat’ Sutta. 25 Such metaphoric play was 
somehow not regarded as ‘conceptual proliferation’ 
(papañca-sañña-saṇkhā), which was the peculiar 
object of the sutta’s critique. 26 Nor was wit, nor 
delight in verbal proliferation, invariably regarded as 
imaginative ‘palpitation’ or ‘agitation’; in this instance, 
perhaps, because it entailed no egocentric projection 
or intrusion. Joy in verbal conceits alone was evidently 
not a ‘disease’ or pustulent ‘abscess’ (tropes are in 
themselves signs of metaphoric proliferation).
The rambling, illicit imagination was apparently one 
which involved an acute form of self-aggrandizement, 
and so metaphysical transgression. Visionary 
speculation, in a closeup of any kind, was always 
condemned as papañca. ‘Stick to sense experience’ was 
the supreme rule:

123
HAROLD BEAVER
‘In the seen there will just be the seen; 
In the heard, just the heard;
In the sensed, just the sensed;
In the recognized, just the recognized.
That’s how, Bāhiya, you must train yourself.’27
That’s maybe the reason why empirical analogies, 
however discursive or far-fetched, were never 
dismissed out of hand. Unlike Plato, then, the Buddha 
did not outlaw traditional poetry and its performers 
so much as transcendental visions and dramatic selfsublimation.
Poetry, in this permitted sense, was both immediate 
and practical, like wisdom (pañña ); its insights were 
thus the best guide to the deconstruction of our 
obsessively proliferating and formulaic schemata. The 
process is imaginatively evoked by an analogy from 
carpentry: ‘Just as a skilled joiner, or his apprentice, 
might knock out and extract a blunt peg by means of 
a sharper one ...’ – each successive peg being replaced 
until finally the sharpest peg of all can be slipped 
out.28 What the Buddha recommended here was the 
substitution of one (distracting) sign by another 
(more helpful) sign as a means of quietening and 
concentrating the mind in meditation. We might well 
wonder whether a carpenter’s trick can be so neatly 
adapted to depth-psychology; whether unconscious 
‘displacements’ in dreams (as argued by Freud) can be 
so readily duplicated by conscious displacements of 
one sign (nimitta) by another in meditation.29

124
THE BROKEN GONG
But poetic images could be said to serve this aim in 
precisely that way – with each more pointed analogy 
deftly knocking out a blunter, cruder analogy, image 
supplanting image, in a sustained deconceptualization 
of the mind. 30 As aids in the reflexive investigation 
of the mind by the mind (vitakka-vicārā ), the play of 
metaphors may not be invited, but it is certainly not 
condemned. It may even be essential until poetic 
intuitions can themselves be left behind.
*  *  *
But play was never authorized for play’s sake. The 
embargo on all forms of physical and intellectual and 
artistic recreation was absolute. No games, no gaming, 
no sport. No athletic prowess of any kind: neither 
boxing, nor wrestling, nor archery, nor bambooacrobatics, nor cock-fights, bullfights, elephant-fights, 
etc. No competitive board-games either. Nothing based 
on skill or chance, like pushpenny (‘flipping cowries 
with thumb and finger’), or dice, or marbles, or chess 
(either ‘on eight-squared or ten-squared boards’). 
Nor witty and fanciful exercises, including those of 
the most intellectually demanding kind: alphabetical 
riddles, mind-reading, ‘playing chess on moon-shaped 
chessboards’ or ‘imaginary chess using the sky as a 
chessboard’. Nor aesthetic diversions like ‘playing with 
brush and paints’, attending recitations, or visiting 
art exhibitions. Not even the most trivial social or 
solitary entertainments: singing, hand-clapping, ball-

125
HAROLD BEAVER
playing, drumming, whistling through folded leaves, 
play-acting, clowning, or make-believe games with 
miniature chariots and ploughs and other children’s 
toys.31 Whoever has faith in a Buddha, declared the 
Buddha, ‘becomes one who abstains from dancing, 
singing, music and theatrical shows.’32
‘Love of company is a thorn to a lover of seclusion. 
Devotion to the sign of beauty is a thorn to one devoted 
to contemplating the sign of loathsomeness in the body. 
Seeing shows is a thorn to one guarding his sense-doors. 
The vicinity of women is a thorn to one leading the holy 
life.’33
The embargo is total since, far from underestimating 
art, the Buddha was fully aware of its all-pervasive and 
uncanny force.
‘Have you ever seen an elaborate painting?’ he 
asked once. ‘Yes, Lord’, his monks replied. ‘Now that 
elaborate painting, bhikkhus, was devised by mind,’ he 
warned them. ‘Therefore mind is more intricate than 
even that elaborate painting.’ 34 On the same analogy, 
of course, the mind is more intricate than even the 
most elaborate poem. For art makes visible, tangible, 
audible the incredibly devious complexity of the mind 
in its creative urge. 35 It not only replicates natural 
objects as signs, but multiplies signs as if they were 
natural objects. ‘Just as a dyer or painter,’ the Buddha 
continued,
‘using turmeric or madder or indigo, can reproduce the 
form [rūpa] of a man or woman down to the smallest

126
THE BROKEN GONG
detail on a piece of cloth or on a wall or wooden panel, 
in the same way, bhikkhus, an ordinary uncounselled 
layman brings body [rūpa] into existence ... brings feelings 
into existence ... brings perception into existence ... brings 
mental formations [saṇkhāra] into existence ... brings 
consciousness into existence.’
We are all creative artists of ourselves: that is, 
we devise ourselves, project ourselves, impersonate 
ourselves, dramatize ourselves in our own narrative 
fictions. Even our appearance, to a large extent, is the 
product of our imagination.36 In Buddhist terms, we are 
all the individual script-writers of our kamma.
Gifted with such magical skill, no wonder we readily fall victims to the spell-binding charm of poets, story-tellers, visionaries. All play on the instrument of 
their feelings and thoughts and perceptions to fabricate 
an illusion, a mirage, a phantasmagoria in excess even 
of that continually projected on to our six sense-organs. Just as the mirage of the autobiographical ‘I’ must 
painstakingly be dissipated, so, correspondingly, must 
all art. Buddhism, at heart, is iconoclastic. Everything 
‘beautiful, exciting, intoxicating, entrancing, captivating’ must be eradicated; for all are forms of self-infatuation and self-entrapment.37
The most provocative, most shocking parable in this 
context is that of the lute:
‘Imagine a king, bhikkhus, or a king’s chief minister, 
who has never heard the sound of a lute. “What is it?” 
he involuntarily exclaims, on hearing it for the first 
time: “What can that be? How beautiful it sounds! How

127
HAROLD BEAVER
exciting! How intoxicating! How entrancing! How utterly 
captivating!” And his attendants tell him: “It is the sound, 
Sire, of what is called a lute.” “Go, fetch me that lute,” he 
orders. So an attendant fetches it, saying: “Here is the lute, 
Sire, whose sound you found so beautiful, so exciting, so 
intoxicating, so entrancing, so utterly captivating.” “Not 
the lute, man,” he snaps back; “just fetch me the sound.” 
Respectfully, the attendant explains: “This instrument 
which is called a lute, Sire, is constructed out of a variety of 
parts, a great number of parts, Sire, that it makes a sound; 
that is to say, owing to the belly, the sounding-board, the 
arm, the head, the strings, the plectrum and the efforts of 
a man’s fingers it makes that sound which you found so 
beautiful, so exciting, so intoxicating, so entrancing, so 
utterly captivating.” The king, or the king’s chief minister, 
then smashes the lute into ten or a hundred pieces. Having 
smashed it, he rips it into splinters, throws them on a fire 
and reduces them to ashes. Having reduced the splinters 
to ashes, he winnows them in a strong wind or tosses them 
in a river to be whirled away by the current. Then he makes 
this pronouncement: “What you call a lute – whatever a socalled lute may be – is a poor contraption, my good man. 
People have been infatuated and misled by it for too long!”’38
The infatuation is real enough; but the sound, a 
mere will-o’-the-wisp. For the sound, in itself, has no 
independent, autonomous existence. Like the ego, it is 
a conditioned, intermittent phenomenon bodied forth 
by the lute.
This may be an extension of another musical 
metaphor in which the body is an instrument whose 
life is breath:

128
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Once upon a time a trumpeter visited a frontier district 
with his conch-shell. On coming to a village, he took up his 
post at its centre, blew his conch-shell three times, set the 
conch-shell on the ground and sat down to one side.
‘Now that puzzled the locals. At once they asked 
themselves: “Where did this sound come from that’s so 
beautiful, so exciting, so intoxicating, so entrancing, so 
utterly captivating?” Gathering round the trumpeter, they 
asked him: “Sir, how did you make such a beautiful, such 
an exciting, such an intoxicating, such an entrancing, such 
an utterly captivating sound?” “Friends,” he replied, “it was 
this conch-shell that made the sound.”
‘Crying, “Speak, Sir Trumpet, speak!” , they grabbed it and 
flung it on its back. But no, it just went “clonk” . They laid 
it mouth down ... tossed it this way and that ... propped it 
over on one side and upside down ... thumped it with their 
fists ... chucked clods of earth at it ... thrashed it with sticks 
... poked it with swords ... shook it sideways, downwards, 
upwards ... all the time crying, “Speak, Sir Trumpet, speak!” 
But it made no sound. No trumpet-sound.
‘What struck the trumpeter, throughout these proceedings, 
was: “What clowns these border folk are! What idiotic 
goings-on! How can they expect to hear a sound unless 
they tackle things right!” So, with all the villagers watching, 
he picked up his conch-shell, gave it three blasts and 
sauntered off.
‘At last it dawned on the frontiersmen. “Ah!” they sighed. 
“When that conch-shell was connected with a human 
being, and was connected with exertion, and was 
connected with wind, then it made a sound. But when

129
HAROLD BEAVER
that conch-shell was not connected with a human being, 
was not connected with exertion, was not connected with 
wind, then that conch-shell was mute!”’39
These villagers, like the king, maul and mangle a 
magically exotic instrument. Both are under a spell 
of enchantment. Both are thrilled by an unexpected 
and artful display. Both, to us, are bound to seem 
impulsive and misguided. But what proved folly for 
the villagers, in their boorish quest for the source of 
that thrill, becomes wisdom in a king who aspires to 
disenchantment and a disembodied purity of mind. As 
the lute’s body (belly, board, arm, head, strings, etc.), in 
its complex fashioning, is the necessary intermediary 
between the human mind (in all its complexity) and 
the intricate enchantment of sound, so those tonal 
vibrations are merely the product of the mind at a 
double remove. Smash the instrument and you may 
frustrate the extravagances of the mind. Bewitching 
beauty, as an end in itself, is invariably suspect; and 
if all art aspires to the condition of music, then the 
emotional range and ravishment of Indian ragas (as 
sounded here) are peculiarly suspect.
*  *  *
Products of art, however, were never the Buddha’s 
main concern. It was their mode of production, rather. It 
was productive vitality – ‘creative’ power, as we should 
say – itself. It was the artisan’s role as an intensely 
skilful, idiosyncratic producer that the Buddha valued:

130
THE BROKEN GONG
‘To give an example, it’s precisely as if a skilled potter or his 
apprentice were to form out of well-kneaded clay whatever 
shape of pot he desired ... Or as if a skilled ivory-cutter or 
his apprentice were to produce from a smooth-polished 
elephant tusk whatever species of carving he might desire 
... Or as if a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice were to 
mould out of carefully wrought gold whatever ornament 
he might desire.’40
We must all become potters, ivory-carvers, 
goldsmiths of ourselves: that was his lesson. We must 
learn to produce a miraculous presence (now visible, 
now invisible) capable of self-multiplication, of 
penetrating obstructions, of plunging in and out of the 
earth, of walking on water, of zooming through time 
and space in a lotus-position, even of touching and 
stroking the sun and moon. The concentration of art, in 
short, was for those mentally generated, supernatural 
attainments that won increasing prestige in later 
phases of Buddhism.
Psychic intensity, then, was always the goal, not 
such misleading, exploitative counterparts as artistic 
potency, artistic invisibility, artistic self-multiplication, 
artistic magic of any kind. Which is why the winged 
imagination of rhapsodes surely posed such a threat. 
Didn’t they too ‘being one, become many; being many, 
become one’? Didn’t they too surreptitiously ‘appear 
and vanish’? Didn’t they too ‘pass unhindered through 
walls, through ramparts, through mountains, as though 
in space’? Didn’t they too ‘dive in and out of earth as 
though in water or go on unbroken water as though

131
HAROLD BEAVER
on earth’? Or ‘seated crosslegged, travel in space like 
winged birds’? Or ‘with their hands, touch and stroke 
the sun and moon’? Yet the Buddha’s disciples were 
expressly forbidden to attempt the linguistic feats of 
a Virgil, Dante, Shakespeare or Milton. Put another 
way, the Buddha’s disciples were to transcend the likes 
of Virgil, Dante, Shakespeare, Milton outside language. 
Not poetic but psychic genius was what the Buddha 
proclaimed.
Even psychic genius (with the exception of MahāMoggallāna and the Buddha himself) was usually 
suspect and quickly discounted since, in all probability, 
it was sham. Like those tricks of the Buddha’s archrival, 
his cousin Devadatta, who only reached ‘that degree 
of psychic power attainable even by those who have 
not entered upon the Noble Path.’ Once, Sāriputta was 
fooled into pronouncing: ‘Great is the psychic power of 
the son of Godhi!’41 But the Buddha’s own final verdict 
was scornful: ‘Owing to special attainments [meaning 
magical powers] though of trifling value, he came to 
a halt midway through his career …’ 42 For ‘psychic 
power’, like its aesthetic counterpart, could too readily 
be misappropriated for eliciting marvels, deceptive 
illusions and Faustian spectaculars as a means of mass 
manipulation to perverse ends.
The Buddha himself had the reputation, in Jain 
circles, of magically converting the disciples of other 
sects; and, in debate with a Jain on one occasion, 
he slily traded on such commonly held beliefs as his 
attainment of magical powers in intense samādhi, 
sufficient to reduce the town of Nāḷandā (where the

132
THE BROKEN GONG
debate took place) or even ‘ten, twenty, thirty, forty or 
fifty Nāḷandās ... to ashes with one mental act of hate’.43 
Though he sometimes employed supernatural powers 
(as in his conversion of Angulimāla) and frequently 
exercised the gift of divination (his ability to read other 
minds), he never compromised his own authority. 
Usually he was intent, rather, on minimizing his 
peculiar gifts. For such attainments, a sutta comments, 
‘if displayed for their own sake in order to impress 
people, are no different from the magical arts called 
respectively “Gandhārī” and “Maṇikā” ...’ which was 
why he, the Buddha, regarded such marvels as a source 
of shame, humiliation and disgust.44

4
The Buddha’s entourage seems often to have been in an 
uproar. Despite his insistence that noise was ‘a thorn to 
meditation’, there was clearly a good deal of distracting 
commotion. One day it might be the tumultuous visit of 
a Brahman household with its food-offerings;1 another 
day a party of local worthies ‘arriving in state-coaches 
with postilions and outriders.’ 2 Once the Buddha grew 
so upset at the incursion of five hundred monks, headed 
by Sāriputta and Mahā-Moggallāna, ‘exchanging 
greetings with the resident bhikkhus, preparing beds 
and putting away bowls and outer robes,’ that he 
peremptorily dismissed the whole Sangha on the spot.
Imagine the hubbub rapidly subsiding. The 
incredulous silence. It was only an appeal from his own 
fellow clansmen that eventually persuaded the Buddha 
to relent:

134
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Lord, there are new bhikkhus here, but recently 
recruited to this Dhamma and Discipline. If they receive 
no opportunity to see the Blessed One, some shift or 
alteration may affect their hearts. Just as when seedlings 
receive no water, some shift or alteration is bound to 
affect them, or when a young calf is denied sight of its 
mother, some shift or alteration could affect its heart, 
so too it may be with them. Lord, let the Blessed One 
welcome and help the Sangha as he used to in the past.’ 3
‘Between them’ , the sutta comments,
‘they were able to restore the Blessed One’s confidence 
with the figures of the seedling and the young calf.’
‘Then the Venerable Mahā-Moggallāna instructed the 
bhikkhus: “Rise, friends, take your bowls and robes. 
The Blessed One’s confidence has been restored by 
the Sakyans ... with the figures of the seedling and the
young calf.”’4
Were these cautions derived, then, from some 
homely local proverbs? Is that why they touched the 
Buddha’s heart? Was the appeal in this instance so 
effective since it was couched in specifically Sakyan 
terms? One thing alone can be deduced with certainty: 
if the Buddha was so susceptible to figurative language, 
it is no wonder that he deployed it so subtly and 
suggestively in his own repeated expositions, dialogues, 
arguments and rhetorical appeals.
*  *  *

135
HAROLD BEAVER
Similes were not just valued for their power, however; 
their key role, in a transcendent universe, was to evoke 
the inconceivable, to ponder the incomprehensible, 
to express the ultimately inexpressible. Infinite time, 
for example. ‘Can it be done, Lord, with a simile?’ 
his monks enquire. ‘It can, bhikkhus,’ the Buddha 
replies, surveying the numberless grains of sand 
from the source to the mouth of the River Ganges for 
comparative calculation. 5 In matters beyond possible 
description, possible analysis, possible computation, 
a leap of the imagination was needed. What could 
not be reckoned might still be poetically confirmed.
For that very reason, perhaps, the introduction of 
a simile into public argument produced a hesitant air, 
as if this might be construed as breaching the terms 
of debate. The brash Aggivessana, for example, as 
if needing permission to proceed, first puts out this 
probe: ‘A simile occurs to me, Master Gotama’; to which 
the Buddha gives formal assent: ‘Let it occur to you, 
Aggivessana.’ After Aggivessana’s crushing defeat, that 
exchange is echoed by an onlooker in a bid to bring 
proceedings imaginatively to a close: ‘A simile occurs to 
me, Master Gotama’; and again the request is formally 
granted: ‘Let it occur to you, Dummukkha.’6
For a repertoire of similes was not confined, of 
course, to the Buddha or his circle. It constituted a 
common coinage between laymen as well as monks. 
What distinguished the Buddha on occasion, he 
claimed, was his originality:

136
THE BROKEN GONG
‘And there came to me spontaneously this stanza never 
heard before ...’7
‘Now three similes occurred to me spontaneously, never 
heard before, unknown before ...’8
By thus drawing attention to his instinctive faculties, he 
must have hoped to encourage self-reliance in others, 
as an anecdote from Rājagaha suggests. A novice, whose 
first timid effort at expounding the Dhamma had failed 
to convert a local prince, turned to the Buddha for 
advice. In the prince’s case, the Buddha determined, 
any exposition was bound to fail. Why? Because a 
dialectical argument in support of renunciation cannot 
hope to convince someone who has never experienced 
the state of renunciation.
To reinforce this phenomenological position, the 
Buddha recounted two parables. The first concerns 
elephants, oxen and horses: all animals capable of 
domestication, yet the divide between the tamed and 
the as-yet-untamed remains absolute. The second 
concerns a ‘high rock’. This rock commands a wide view 
of ‘beautiful parks and orchards, meadows and lakes,’ 
a view that has to be seen to be believed; in fact, that 
cannot be believed unless one has been personally taken 
by the arm by a friend and helped to make the laborious 
and breath-consuming ascent. Yahooing from the top 
is no good. Shouting is meaningless. Without friendly 
intervention and first-hand experience, anyone down 
below is helplessly ‘obstructed by this great rock’.
In case of a misunderstanding, the Buddha at once 
supplied an allegorical key:

137
HAROLD BEAVER
‘So too, Aciravata, Prince Jayasena is obstructed by a still 
greater rock of ignorance; the rewards of renunciation can 
never be known to a prince daily lapped in sensuality.’
The novice must have been dazzled by the performance. 
But the Buddha was not yet finished. In fact, he had 
only just reached the punch-line: ‘Aciravata, if these 
two similes had occurred to you spontaneously while 
instructing Prince Jayasena, he might have acquired 
confidence in you ...’ At which the novice plucked up 
enough courage to ask: ‘Venerable sir, how should 
these two similes occur to me spontaneously, never 
heard before, as they occurred to the Blessed One?’9
As it happens we can guess at the source of the 
Parable of the Rock, since the Buddha had his own 
elevated retreat (with wide and wonderful views) above 
Rājagaha; it was known as Vulture Peak Rock. 10 But 
young Aciravata surely had a right to feel perplexed. 
For the source of the poetic imagination is mysterious 
and (as we might say) springs from the unconscious. 
It can no more be taught than dreaming; and, in the 
event, his question was left dangling. The Buddha 
merely embellished and further expounded the simile 
of the tamed and untamed elephants. Even he was 
unable to instil literary originality. Unless a novice was 
to catch it, as it were, by stimulus or contagion.
*  *  *
By underlining the inventive wealth and sheer 
novelty of his imagination, however, the Buddha also

138
THE BROKEN GONG
implied that the main run of his similes, however apt, 
was not necessarily unique. The pervasive power of 
figurative language was not in question. But there was 
no patent in similes, as Ānanda once found to his cost. 
Wishing to speak up for the Buddha, who was shrewdly 
holding aloof, he boldly began: ‘Friend, I shall give you 
a simile; for with the help of a simile intelligent people 
come to understand the meaning of what is said.’11
What he launched into, though, was the simile of a 
walled city with a wise gate-keeper at a single gate:
‘Friend, imagine a frontier fortress, far from the royal 
capital, with solid ramparts and turrets and just one 
gateway. The gate-keeper – being an experienced, 
prudent fellow – keeps out all strangers, admitting only 
those he knows. On his patrols round the walls, he spots 
neither cavity nor break in the ramparts, not a slit wide 
enough even for a cat to slip through. Surely he has 
a right to conclude that whatever man-size creatures 
enter or leave the fort can do so only by that one gate.’
In Buddhist circles, this had clearly become a 
commonplace image for the ‘mind’; it is repeated 
verbatim by Sāriputta at least three times. 12 In 
Ānanda’s context, however, it proves woefully inept. 
Far from the royal stronghold representing the ‘mind’, 
alertly guarded by watchfulness (sāti ), the encircled 
fortress has here been misappropriated to worldly 
suffering (dukkha) whose only outlet (or ‘escape’) 
is the Dhamma. But why, then, that sagacious gatekeeper? Why is the question of admittance transformed 
to one of outlets? The simile, as used by both Ānanda

139
HAROLD BEAVER
and Sāriputta, originated in all probability with the 
Buddha. In conscientiously attempting to cover for his 
Master, Ānanda borrowed not only his figurative style 
but (with these gauche results) the figura itself.
*  *  *
Ānanda surely meant nothing subversive. Signs 
derive from a process of substitution. All signs are 
open to interpretation. As Nāgasena declared: ‘I shall 
explain one exposition by another exposition, one 
comparison by another comparison, one characteristic 
by another characteristic, one quality by another 
quality …’13 So Ānanda may genuinely have conceived 
the walled city this way; Sāriputta, that way. Whether 
verbally or physically or visually expressed, whether 
condensed into icons or systematized into codes, each 
meaning needs scrupulous teasing-out. Just as a mime, 
who gestures and leaps about the stage exhibiting 
signs, needs quick-witted monitoring. Which is how 
Italo Calvino imagined Marco Polo conversing with
Kublai Khan:
‘The Great Khan deciphered the signs, but the connection 
between them and the places visited remained uncertain; 
he never knew whether Marco wished to enact an 
adventure that had befallen him on his journey, an exploit 
of the city’s founder, the prophecy of an astrologer, a rebus 
or a charade to indicate a name. But, obscure or obvious as 
it might be, everything Marco displayed had the power of

140
THE BROKEN GONG
emblems, which, once seen, cannot be forgotten or 
confused.’14
Once speech set in – once Marco Polo had mastered 
the Tartar tongue – ‘you would have said communication 
between them was less happy than in the past.’ Which 
is exactly as Rousseau argued in his Essai sur l’origine 
des langues: the eloquence of emblems is preferable to 
the poor specificity of speech. Just as for Buddhists too 
much speech, too much verbal explication, tends to 
prove an embarrassment and trial.
Take that truncated stump which is one such 
Buddhist emblem. Planted in the forecourt of Wat Pah 
Nanachat,15 it must prove impenetrable for visitors 
unaware of its scriptural source defining a Buddha as 
one who has abandoned form, ‘cut off at the root, like 
a palm-tree stump that can no longer regenerate and 
bud to fruition.’16 Only then does the palm-tree stump, 
in all its ugliness, stand revealed as a sublime emblem 
of liberation.
*  *  *
It was in 1885 that a Buddhist flag was ceremoniously 
hoisted in Tokyo. Designed by an American, 
Colonel Henry Steel Olcott, its logo for the first time 
distinguished Buddhism, as a world communion, 
from all other religions. But flaunting such global 
insignia had never been a Buddhist priority. No official 
missionaries. No ‘papal’ authority. No authorized 
scriptures. No attempt at worldwide orthodoxy. Only

141
HAROLD BEAVER
an insistence on the transcendent status of its founder 
whose image, some six hundred years after death, 
displayed an odd protuberance from the cranium 
above its elongated earlobes. 17 While the suttas were 
still being orally transmitted, that is, his body was 
simultaneously transformed into an elaborate corpus 
of magical signs.
Thirty-two astrological ‘Marks of a Great Man’18 were 
said to distinguish the Buddha’s body from head to toe: 
his tongue was so large that it could lick both ear-holes, 
both nostrils and cover ‘the whole of his forehead’; 19 
on the soles of his feet were incised ‘wheels with a 
thousand spokes, complete with hubs and rims’; 20 his 
fingers were webbed; without stooping, the palms of 
both his hands rubbed his knees and the spread of his 
outstretched arms equalled his height; his body-hairs 
grew singly, each hair in its own pore; his skin was of a 
golden hue; his eyes, a deep shade of blue; he had forty 
teeth without gaps; he had eyelashes like an ox ... Even 
his male member, on occasion, became the object of 
supernatural, private display. 21 All of which links him 
to the Vedas; and later Indian fantasy pursued similar 
memorabilia with the emergence of Bodhisattvas in 
the Mahayana tradition.
This is not something the Buddha, whom we know 
from the suttas, could ever have encouraged. At Sanchi, 
founded by the great Mauryan emperor Aśoka in the 
third century BCE, his presence is still only attested by 
a tree, a footprint, a wheel and an empty throne.
*  *  *

142
THE BROKEN GONG
The Buddha’s authentic touch, rather, is to be 
found in those impromptu discourses and dialogues 
which analyse the same basic premises, again and 
again, in cycles ranging from elaborate aetiologies to 
disconcerting fables.
His was an illiterate age. His gallery of similes and 
allegories were intended, above all, as mnemonic 
aids, instinctively to be grasped for their pictorial and 
narrative appeal. Just as his pervasive numerical sets 
were to be memorized, like shopping-lists, like rosarybeads, by insistent repetition. The Aṅguttara Nikāya 
(consisting of a book of solo items, a book of dual items, 
a book of triple items, a book of quadruple items and 
so forth to its final book of elevenfold items) may seem 
a taxonomical oddity to us. But such compiling of data 
in numerical bundles was an essential feature of all 
preliterate oral training.
Nor were such devices so different from the 
‘memoria technica’ of the Renaissance,22 which allocated 
items, say, in rhetorical texts that needed memorizing, 
to various statues and pillars and pediments of a 
diagrammatic façade in much the same way as the 
Buddha assigned ‘conscience’ to the pole, ‘mind’ to the 
reins, ‘mindfulness’ to the charioteer, ‘meditation’ to 
the axle and ‘energy’ to the wheels of a diagrammatic, 
do-it-yourself ‘Chariot-according-to-the-Dhamma’. 23 
Sometimes a cartoon-like set of allegorical tableaux 
was combined into a strip. As in these elevenfold 
characteristics of a good herdsman: who knows the 
watering-places, disinfects the cattle-sheds, picks

143
HAROLD BEAVER
out flies’ eggs from abrasion, bandages wounds, etc. 24 
Though spatially scattered across the landscape, such 
a panorama was equally capable, point by point, of 
spiritual recuperation by the devout bhikkhu.
*  *  *
If our modern concern, above all else, is with 
matters of definition, the Indian mind was typically 
engaged with questions of marks or signs. What are the 
distinctive marks of a Buddha? What are the significant 
features of chariots? What are the key characteristics 
of a good herdsman? Such queries were themselves 
marks of genuine philosophical engagement. So 
Nāgasena, for one, must already have anticipated the 
King’s intervention when asked to distinguish ‘the 
characteristic mark of reasoning’ from that of ‘wisdom’; 
and doubtless he had an epigram ready. ‘Taking hold’, 
he replied, ‘is the mark of reasoning; cutting off is the 
mark of wisdom.’ But taking hold how? Cutting off 
how? And can these acts of holding and cutting be 
performed simultaneously? The distinction seems too 
generalized, too abstract. So King Milinda proposed the 
next decisive move. ‘Give me an illustration,’ he said.
We may be sure that Nāgasena had an apposite 
image in reserve. For, half disclosing it, he countered: 
‘Tell me, O King, how do barley reapers reap the 
barley?’ That is, like all good teachers, he encouraged 
his royal pupil to think through his own imaginative 
task; and the King, as it turned out, could envisage a

144
THE BROKEN GONG
harvesting scene well enough: ‘They grasp the barley 
into a bunch with the left hand and, with a sickle in 
the right, they cut the barley.’ And there you have it. 
Concise and emblematic as an inn sign: left hand and 
right performing their different skills in one composite 
gesture. It only needed the Master to decode the figure: 
‘Just so, O King, the recluse takes hold of his mind with 
reasoning and cuts off the defilements with wisdom.’25
*  *  *
Such signs rarely become events in their own right. 
They function more like hieroglyphs or heraldic devices 
– diagrams not yet quick with life, not yet eager to 
displace (even for their brief moment of glory) the main 
thrust of the debate. Pali texts are studded with such 
signs. Take, for example, Sāriputta’s effort to identify 
the psychological notion of interdependence with the 
image of  ‘a black and a white ox bound together by 
one rope or one yoke-tie.’26 Again, the frame, as in that 
snapshot of the reapers, is frozen. The sole aim is to 
evoke an empirical situation that can be tested. The sole 
point is the follow-up question: ‘Would it be right [in 
Sāriputta’s words] to say that the black ox is the fetter 
of the white ox, or the white ox of the black?’ Yet even 
a stock image of this kind can remain enchanting, as 
when the beauty of the ‘homeless life’ is mysteriously 
pronounced ‘as utterly pure and polished as a conchshell.’27 This may be a formula – a reflex response in 
a stereotyped context – but, like stock epithets in oral 
epic, it never becomes dulled to a mere cliché.

145
HAROLD BEAVER
*  *  *
The Buddha was master of such single sustained 
images, drawn from his immediate environment, like 
that of rivers and streams; or that of fire in perhaps the 
most famous of his sermons, the Fire Sermon, preached 
at Gayā Scarp, near Bodh Gayā, for the spiritual 
confirmation of three fire-worshippers and their 
numerous disciples after a great flood had miraculously 
drenched their sacrifices.28
But often a sign is not so minutely determined. It 
remains more diffuse, retains more waste matter for 
casual appropriation. Take the Buddha’s sign for the 
Dhamma itself: ‘Just as the great ocean has only one 
taste, the taste of salt, so has this teaching only one taste, 
the taste of freedom. 29 Yet salt water can notoriously 
not be drunk; and far from salt, the Buddha’s teaching 
(by general consent) was intoxicatingly sweet. As the 
Brahman Pingiyāni testified: ‘Just as someone weak 
from hunger, coming across honeycake, will enjoy its 
sweet, delicious taste, so, my dear sir, anyone hearing 
the Venerable Gotama’s Dhamma will enjoy supreme 
confidence in his heart.’ 30 It is not the taste, then, 
that can have been the Buddha’s primary concern, 
but salt as the inescapable, omnipresent element 
pervading, and absorbed by, oceans everywhere. It is 
the idea of diffusion which links the taste of freedom 
(or deliverance) with the taste of salt. That is the slight 
shock of recognition which the simile offers, even 
while the vast, all-embracing ocean resounds, at the 
very edge of perception, as an inscrutable token of the 
Dhamma itself.

146
THE BROKEN GONG
Freedom for what, though? Above all, for meditative 
practice. Each step and aspect of insight meditation 
(vipassanā) was at some point assigned its appropriate 
emblem, not as a mystery (for unravelling), but as an 
aid for contemplation. For example, to concentrate 
the mind by a rallentando, or deliberate slowing of 
the pulse, to a more subtle, studied calm: ‘Just as a 
fast walker might think: “Why am I hurrying? Why 
not slow down?” And, on reducing his pace: “What if 
I stood still?” And on stopping: “Why keep standing? 
Why not sit down?” And on sitting down: “Why just sit 
here? Why not lie down?”’31
But even after such calming concentration, thoughts 
can stray: ‘As in the last month of the rains, when 
crops are thick, a herdsman must tap and poke his 
cows – now on this side, now on that – to restrain and 
guide them with his stick ...’ 32 For thoughts disperse 
themselves and attach themselves to any available 
object until their starting-point, like a banyan overrun 
by creepers, is completely hidden. 33 Such wild tangles 
need systematic cultivation, ‘just as in the autumn 
a farmer with a large plough slices through all the 
spreading rootlets as he ploughs.’ 34 Vassakāra, chief 
minister of Magadha, returning from Vesālī, reported 
on just such an encounter with the Buddha. ‘While he 
was there,’ he told Ānanda, ‘Master Gotama praised 
meditation in many a figure.’35
The function of such signs as the frantic pedestrian, 
the professional herdsman, the hidden banyan or the 
autumn ploughman is at least fourfold: first, to illustrate

147
HAROLD BEAVER
(however tangentially) wholly mental phenomena; 
second, to differentiate (however artificially) each 
stage of the meditative process; third, to promote (by 
verbal guidance) a meditative practice that can, at best, 
be only approximated; and fourth, to fix the practice 
and its sequence by each figura in the minds of the 
uninitiated. To such aids for meditation I shall return. 
Here I wish to trace the gradual animation of these inset 
figures as a narrative impulse invades their world. That 
impulse, though, was never sustained beyond the needs 
of illustration. Whatever may look, at first glance, like 
an epic simile in the suttas turns out, on consideration, 
never to be gratuitous, or imaginatively extravagant, 
in Homer’s way.
*  *  *
The Buddha himself might have considered the use 
of all such similes as a deliberate attempt at category 
confusion: that is, a translation of one category of 
natural law (niyāma ) to another, by applying physical 
laws (utuniyāma) – such as those controlling winds and 
rainfall, for example – to psychic laws (cittaniyāma ) 
that control the workings of the mind; or applying 
biological laws (bījaniyāma) that determine heredity, to 
the universal moral law (kammaniyāma ) that governs 
all human behaviour. ‘As the seed, so the fruit,’ ran the 
proverb.36 An unwholesome act, he echoed, ‘is like a 
margosa seed, or seed of the bitter gourd, planted in 
moist soil. The earth and water, ingested as nutriment, 
are wholly modified into an acridly pungent, foul taste.’

148
THE BROKEN GONG
A wholesome act, on the other hand, ‘is like a sugarcane seed, or wheat seed or fruit seed, planted in moist 
soil. The earth and water, ingested as nutriment, are 
converted into a sweet, refreshing and wholly delicious 
taste.’37 Though such categories could also be reversed, 
transforming man-made objects (like chariots, as we 
have seen) by means of a spiritual interpretation; or 
inserting industrial contrivances into a categorical 
‘natural’ or psychological context. As in this awesomely 
accumulative portrait of Māra (the personification of 
evil) in the guise of a huge royal nāga serpent:
‘His body was as big as a boat made of a single tree trunk; 
his hood was as broad as a brewer’s mat; his eyes were as 
big as Kosalan brass plates; his tongue flickered in and out 
of his mouth like forked lightning in and out of a thunder 
cloud; the sound of his breathing was like the sound of a 
smith’s bellows blowing.’38
Or in the very opening verses of the Dhammapada:
‘Our life is the creation of our mind. With an impure mind, 
whatever one says or does brings suffering in its wake, just 
as the cartwheel follows the ox’s hoof. With a pure mind, 
whatever one says or does brings happiness in its wake, 
just as the shadow follows its owner.’39
This raises some curious questions. Why should not 
the cartwheel radiate joy as it rolls in the wake of the 
pure mind? Why should not the shadow (of suffering) 
follow the defective mind? Here the symbolic fit is no 
longer incontrovertible; the point-counterpoint logic 
of the barley-reaper, no longer applicable. Perhaps the

149
HAROLD BEAVER
Buddha felt that a natural phenomenon (the flitting 
shadow) was more suitably bonded to mental serenity; 
while a lumbering man-made contraption (the wheel), 
however skilled the wainwright, more resonant with 
the rumblings of mental malformations. Whichever 
it may be, these signs are clearly not open to infinite 
semiosis. Ultimately, one aspect only is significant: the 
feeling of being tracked – of being constantly policed 
– that leads either to the paranoia of a persecution 
complex (the wheel) or the buoyant flexibility of selfabandonment (the shadow).
No longer static, such signs conjure up a process, 
a momentum in time. Nothing, however briefly 
glimpsed, is immobilized: whether ox-cart or shadow, 
‘hot coals smothered in ashes’ or ‘freshly squeezed 
milk’.40 The milk will inevitably ‘turn sour’ just as the 
coals, sooner or later, must lose their heat. Everything 
is constantly on the move with a steady but inscrutable 
metamorphosis:
‘Just as a carpenter’s adze shows marks of wear-and-tear 
from fingers and thumb, without the carpenter being able 
to tell precisely how much was worn yesterday or today or 
any other day; all he knows is that everyday usage wore it 
away ... Or just as a sea-going boat, beached for six months 
by the winter tide, will have its rigging shredded by wind 
and timbers warped by sun and rain ...’41
From mere thumb-marks or shreds, one can never be 
sure exactly how much was rubbed, or rotted, off day 
by day; only that change is constant and that under

150
THE BROKEN GONG
sufficiently rigorous scrutiny, everything would be 
seen to be in motion.
Compare the statuesque reaper in the barley with 
another harvesting scene: two bundles of reeds stacked 
to support each other. Remove one sheaf and the other 
will fall; remove the second and the first will fall. 42 
Such a stook, far from inert, is tense with hidden sags, 
potential collapse and disintegration. The stability of 
the interlocking image is hypothetical, the slippage 
already foreshadowed. The poise, the equilibrium, the 
interdependence – all are threatened.
Or recall the leper ‘with sores and abscesses, riddled 
with worms, who scratches the scabs off his wounds 
and cauterizes his limbs with a burning ember ...’ 43 
He could merely be read as a type emblematic of a 
diseased constitution overwhelmed by sensuality. But 
the figure is far from simple: numbed, he cauterizes his 
open sores (mistaking pain for pleasure) and scratches 
at the foul-smelling scabs ‘finding relief in tickling’. 
However deadened by addiction, craving still feeds on 
indulgence, indulgence on craving, in a vicious circle 
that finds a ‘measure of satisfaction in dependence’. 
The leper, then, is not immobilized in some cautionary 
pose. He does not simply represent disease or lust-inaction. His nervous fuss is masochistic in origin – the 
very reverse of independence. His restless twitching 
and grooming presents a psychological study of selfabuse, self-titillation and self-destruction.

151
HAROLD BEAVER
It was this intrusive, probing, moulding mode that 
Coleridge labelled ‘esemplastic’; and the Buddha’s 
imagination at all times probed and intruded and 
colluded.44 Even in such an unexpected image as that of 
the reformed wrong-doer who, after accumulating bad 
kamma in the past, now creates good kamma to brighten 
‘the world like the moon appearing from behind a 
cloud.’45 With one luminous touch the Buddha both 
vindicates human endeavour and magically co-opts the 
universe. Only the sudden radiance is significant: light 
dazzling out of darkness and the possible transience of 
that light; since the shifting mass of cloud as well as the 
moon, of course, are again in constant motion.
*  *  *
For everything that we can touch and see and hear 
is evanescent. Whatever rehearses the evasive tricks 
and deformities of the mind cannot be timeless. Even 
what is beyond change, in the holy life, can only be 
negatively evoked as a yellow leaf that cannot turn 
green again, a lopped palm tree that cannot bud again, 
a cracked stone that cannot be repaired, a sick man 
not returning to his vomit.46 Only the imperturbable is 
timeless.
This esemplastic quality of the Buddha’s imagination 
stayed with him from at least the age of thirty-five (on 
attaining Enlightenment) to that of eighty (on the very 
brink of death). Compare another passage from the 
Milindapānha with the Buddha’s great cry at the very

152
THE BROKEN GONG
point of Enlightenment. At issue is the characteristic 
mark of concentration (samādhi ). In the Milindapānha, 
the answer offered is: ‘All good qualities acknowledge 
concentration as their chief. They incline towards it 
and lead upwards to it.’ 47 Then, as a follow-up, King 
Milinda is given this diagrammatic view of a roof: ‘As 
the rafters of a house incline and lead up to the ridgepole, which is its apex, so too all good qualities incline 
and lead up to concentration.’
It’s a demonstration kit, though these exposed 
rafters reveal nothing beyond the original statement. 
If anything, they undermine it. For the King might 
well be left wondering why a ridge-pole was thought 
a fitting embodiment for samādhi rather than, say, 
the foundation or platform which supports the whole 
structure. In fact, it was a current cliché that could be 
pre-empted for any outstanding quality, good or bad. 
Even the Buddha, on occasion, was to use it – in relation 
to sloppy conduct, for instance, or sloppy practice 
generally. ‘Just as the beams of a sloping roof all rise to 
a peak, meet at a peak, are joined at a peak,’ he warned 
his bhikkhus, ‘so too all unskilful states, whatever they 
be, are rooted in ignorance, meet in ignorance, are 
combined with ignorance.’48
But bursting out of samādhi, at the triumphant 
climax of Enlightenment, he typically deconstructed 
this whole naïve architectural programme:
‘Builder, you’ve been seen! You shall never build a house 
again! 
All your rafters are broken! The ridge-pole shattered! 
My mind is gone to nibbāna. This is the end of craving.’49

153
HAROLD BEAVER
Here there is no neat, predictable fit; and the ‘ridgepole’ is certainly not ‘concentration’. If anything, 
it is lofty, self-satisfied ignorance supported by the 
rafters of defilement. It’s a demolition job. And the cry 
(prosopopoeia, in rhetorical terms) is addressed to Māra 
in the shape of his mighty architect, Desire:
‘For countless births I wandered in saṃsāra,
Seeking but not finding the builder of this house. 
Painful is repeated birth!’50
From that time on, the Buddha’s mind was always 
to be dynamically on the move. Naturally dramatic, it 
continually probed, spied, arrested – thinking through 
images, remoulding images in terms of images.
Forty-five years after this inspired tear-down of 
mental fabrications, he turned to the slow and painful 
attrition of the human body, sustained in the end only 
by extreme mental detachment. Frail and decrepit, the 
Buddha confessed to Ānanda:
‘Just as an old worn-out cart is held together merely by 
cording and patching, so the body of the Tathāgata is 
held together merely by the force of absorption in Final 
Attainment [phala samāpatti]. Ānanda, it is only when the 
Tathāgata abides in the signless [animitta] Concentration of 
Mind, numbed to sensation and disregarding phenomena, 
that his body is at ease.’51
That destructive solvent, distilled in concentration, and 
this dogged effort at self-maintenance are expressed in 
the same homely, unsettling terms.
*  *  *

154
THE BROKEN GONG
Not only can each image be explored by narrative 
thrusts from within, it can also be multiplied 
for comparative focus from without; and such 
multiplications could be extended almost indefinitely.
Freedom was the Buddha’s theme: both positive 
freedom (for meditative practice) and negative 
freedom (from mental constraints). 52 It was to a lewd 
and indolent Everyman, peevish with worry and 
uncertainty, that the Buddha addressed himself. For 
these constraints, or ‘hindrances’ (nīvaraṇas ), were 
reckoned five in number: sensuality, spite, uncertainty 
and agitation/lethargy (that contrapuntal pair). To 
deliverance from their fivefold predations the Buddha 
devoted a string of five overlapping tales, each with 
a matching moral drawn from the worlds of finance, 
medicine, law, slavery and commerce: ‘Suppose a man 
borrowed a loan ... Suppose a man were racked with 
pain ... suppose a man were imprisoned ... suppose a 
man became a slave ... Suppose a merchant crossed a 
desert ...’53
Each tale was delivered as a biographical sketch; each 
sketch, summed up at its close with an autobiographical 
reflection – a moment of self-recognition, or ‘epiphany’ 
as we might call it:
‘I used to speculate on borrowed capital. Now my business 
is flourishing. I’ve paid off all my old debts with profit to 
spare – I’m delighted to say – to provide for my wife and 
children.’
‘I used to be racked with pain, so sick that I could hardly 
eat, let alone move. Now my appetite’s come back, the

155
HAROLD BEAVER
fever’s gone – I’m delighted to say – and I’ve regained all 
my former strength.’
‘I used to be locked up in prison. Now at last I’ve been 
released. I’m safe and sound – I’m delighted to say – with 
all my property intact.’
‘I used to be a slave, subject to another’s whim, unable to 
move about as I pleased. Now that I’ve been freed – I’m 
delighted to say – I’m my own man again, able to go when 
and where I please.’
‘Half-starved, I took a caravan across the desert. Now that 
long and dangerous trek is done. I’m back on my home 
ground safe and sound – I’m delighted to say – with no 
material loss incurred.’
It was this epiphany – this moment of solitary selfawareness – that was always the crux of the matter. 
Something beyond a teacher’s reach which could only 
be illustrated by such exemplary fictions.
For the subjects of these five miniature portraits 
were really little more than types: the discharged 
debtor, the recovered patient, the released prisoner, 
the emancipated slave, the merchant’s homecoming. 
The multiplicity, however, unleashes a cumulative 
power by suggesting an overall interdependence 
between legal and financial, and medical and social, and 
commercial aspects of freedom with their attendant 
blessings of health, wealth, strength, security and peace 
of mind. (These tales, incidentally, were recounted to 
a renegade king.) For the ultimate lesson was one of 
self-control. It is mastery that the Buddha was always 
extolling – reasserting mastery over ourselves, as 
the Buddha warned Ānanda shortly before his death:

156
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Therefore let yourself be your own firm support; 
and let yourself – not anyone, or anything, else – be
your refuge.’54
*  *  *
Human nature needed incessant monitoring and 
self-analysis. Unlike Emanuel Swedenborg, however, 
the Buddha never prided himself on decoding the 
mysteries of nature. There were professionals for that, 
experts everywhere soliciting custom to explicate 
natural signs: items such as peculiar patterns made by 
rat bites, say, or the jarring cacophony of cawing crows, 
as well as more commonplace jobs such as interpreting 
a client’s physiognomy or physique or landmarks in 
his fields. Part estate-agent, part marriage-broker, part 
Lavater, part Spurzheim, the local soothsayer was a bit 
of each rolled into one. For a fee, of course. Performing 
such services was expressly forbidden to bhikkhus by 
the Buddha.
For he, too, had an eye for decoding character as 
well as landscape. The Buddha’s concern, however, 
was never in foretelling the future (as in palmistry or 
astrology), but in eliciting the moral implications of the 
present. Otherwise, let it go. No posturing on mountain 
or sea-shore! No breathless babbling: ‘The ocean! The 
ocean!’ Monks are firmly reminded that it’s just ‘a great 
heap of water, a great extent of water.’55 Nothing more. 
Rather than wax enthusiastic about the mystery of 
water – the very idea of water – monks were advised

157
HAROLD BEAVER
consistently to turn inward to the subjective life. The 
whole phenomenology of sense-data for the Buddha 
was an ‘ocean’ in which he was painfully immersed. 
Or rather, the eye was the ‘ocean’ (fraught ‘with waves 
and whirlpools’), which it is our task to withstand.
But on one occasion the Buddha was quite prepared 
to discuss signs of the ocean: in conversation with 
a water-sprite. Pahārāda, chief of the Asuras, had 
hesitated eleven years before finally paying a call; 
and even when he did, he felt too shy to say a word. 
That’s why – to set him at ease – the Buddha put to him 
a question about his native element: ‘Now, Pahārāda, 
how many wonders do the Asuras, to their delight, 
regularly perceive in the great ocean?’ That must have 
reassured the Asura. For he proudly replied, ‘eight’:
1. It slopes away gradually;
2. Its capacity is stable without overflowing;
3. It cannot endure corpses;
4. Great rivers lose their identity in it;
5. Despite rainfall swelling such drainage, it never 
 increases nor decreases;
6. It has only one taste, that of salt;
7. It is filled with valuables: pearls and shells and
 gems, etc.;
8. It is the abode of giants and demigods.56
The Buddha, without demur, adopted this bizarre 
account – adapting it point by point as if it had proved 
an unsuspected key to the Dhamma – in his reply:

158
THE BROKEN GONG
Training and progress in the Dhamma, too, is gradual, with 
no precipitous short cuts;
The discipline, too, is not to be transgressed;
The Order, too, will not tolerate rotten or hypocritical 
members;
All four castes, too, merge their identity in it;
In nibbāna, too, there is neither increase nor decrease;
The Dhamma, too, has only one taste, that of liberation;
In it, too, there are precious things: the Four Foundations 
of Mindfulness, the Noble Eightfold Path, etc.;
It, too, is the abode of great beings: from ‘Stream-entrants’ 
to Arahants.
That, then, is the context of the famous ‘taste’; which 
may well seem over-contrived to us. But the Buddha’s 
quick wit in utilizing Pahārāda’s catalogue attests not 
only to his dialectical mastery in debate, or to his skill 
in impromptu decipherment, or even to a widespread 
fascination with cryptic meanings, but to a rhetorical 
ruse: that just as the Dhamma can be vindicated by an 
appeal to the visible world (in image or story), so can 
the physical world (mediated by the spirit of the ocean) 
be vindicated by an appeal to the Dhamma.57 The traffic 
in the Buddha’s mind is in constant two-way flux. Just 
as he had granted Ānanda’s request for a description 
of the ‘best chariot according to the Dhamma’, so here 
he corroborates Pahārāda’s account of the ocean as the 
best of all possible oceans according to the Dhamma. 
For the Enlightened One, if not for the unenlightened, 
they are simply twin aspects of a single whole.

5
An allegory is a simile with its comparative hinge, or 
link, removed. By deleting ‘just as’, or ‘like’, or ‘as if’, 
however, the simile has not merely been detached 
to float free; it has been transformed into something fluid and potentially dynamic. It has become an
independent story.
This gain in dramatic momentum is bound to entail 
a disorientating loss of focus. As a story, it inevitably 
accumulates distracting detail; as an allegory, it is 
now likely to require explication, even interpretation. 
For allegory is a form of duplicity: a way of saying 
one thing in order to mean something else. But not, 
as in normal talk, deliberately to mislead. Allegorical 
double-talk may be openly acknowledged; may be 
clearly signposted; may even be demonstrated and 
correlated point-counterpoint. Though the duplicit 
meanings must never, on any account, be allowed to

160
THE BROKEN GONG
converge or merge. Like train tracks, rather, they must 
systematically preserve the semiotic divide between 
their parallel lines.
Symbols, on the other hand, collapse this figural/
factual divide. Self-contained, they transgress semiotic 
duality. Self-sufficient, they lurk, as Coleridge noted, 
within the very reality which they would illumine. 1 
Successfully to invoke them, therefore, restores a 
transcendent harmony to our world, while allegory 
holds out no such promise. It evokes, rather, the harsh 
discordance of human experience, fated always to 
compare, and to connect, and to decipher, but never 
to rest in undifferentiated and unreflecting coherence.
It follows that symbols, like metaphors in their 
aesthetic play, require little or no interpretation; while 
allegories, proceeding from general or abstract notions 
to an aesthetic presentation framed ‘almost at will’, are 
never so readily, so instinctively grasped. 2 They must 
be decoded first. They require effort, which takes time, 
since image and meaning are not instantaneously fused. 
To the contrary, allegory insists that they are separate 
and must remain separate, just as our consciousness 
and the world are and will always remain strictly 
separate, so that every attempt – every symbolic 
attempt – to blur their separateness must be fraudulent.
For allegory, as Walter Benjamin argued, is more 
than just a verbal technique; it acts as both challenge 
and corrective to art. By its uncoupling of images 
from their meanings – by its constant and piecemeal 
fragmentation – it rejects the fatal illusion of symbolic

161
HAROLD BEAVER
fusion; and it does so by being self-consciously ‘stagey’. 
Since what can be deliberately staged can also be 
deliberately unstaged, dismantled, disintegrated. It 
is a versatile technique, therefore, ever aware of its 
origins in the theatre of the imagination. Which may 
help to explain why it was also the Buddha’s favourite 
trope. For if the essential characteristic of allegory is 
its discontinuity, its unresolvable discrepancy between 
signification and sign, its pervasive dualism of ‘meaning 
and reality’, then the allegorical mode was the perfect 
complement to his vision of the world as illusion, 
Prospero-like, to be dissolved.3
‘And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, 
Leave not a rack behind.’4
It was precisely the ‘baseless fabric’ of its theatricality 
that suited the Buddha’s larger purposes. Properly 
understood, then, allegory is not only an aspect of his 
art (treated with his usual virtuosity), but itself another 
lesson in insubstantiality, in maya, in illusion.
Of course, the Buddha too, on occasion, pandered to 
the symbolic imagination: as, for example, in his initial 
Wheeling of the Law (Dhamma-cakkappavattana Sutta), 
set in motion at Benares, in the Deer Park at Isipatāna, 
‘which cannot be stopped by a monk, or Brahman, or 
deity, or Māra, or Divinity or anyone in the world.’ 5 Or 
in his frequent invocation of the lotus:
‘Just as a blue or red or white lotus is born in water, grows 
in water and stands up untouched above the water, so too 
I, who was born in the world and grew up in the world,

162
THE BROKEN GONG
have transcended the world and live untouched by the 
world. Remember me as one who is enlightened.’6
And his disciples soon devoted themselves to further 
emblems. 
In the early centuries after his death it was 
such synecdoche as the Bodhi-tree (for the crisis 
of his Enlightenment) and the Stupa (for his final 
transfiguration) and his sacred footprint, as well 
as such metonymic images as the Wheel and the 
Lotus, that constituted the Buddha’s presence, or 
rather represented the continuing message of his 
Dhamma. But, as the Buddha well knew, all such 
symbols are compromised; they speak a language 
of desire, which is another form of wish-fulfilment. 
Like a deconstructionist avant la lettre, he wanted us 
to understand ‘the impossibility for the language of 
poetry to appropriate anything, be it as consciousness, 
as object, or as a synthesis of both.’7 From the Buddha’s 
point of view, the symbolic promise of harmony – the 
Dantean quest for a cosmic unity in artistic unity – was 
yet another infallible mark of ignorance and delusion.
*  *  *
The Tathāgata was never a saviour in the Christian 
sense. His function was more like that of a teacher, or 
surgeon-physician, or alarm-clock (buddho, ‘one who 
wakes’), since he alone was an Awakened One. 8 In the 
theatre of his imagination, he played many roles. The 
part best suited to him, perhaps, was that of journeyman.

163
HAROLD BEAVER
His favourite scenario, certainly, was that of journeys 
in which he starred as pioneer ‘of the undiscovered 
way’,9 or guide for the perplexed, or escort, or head of 
a caravan traversing hostile and waterless wastes. 10 Or 
again he might turn up as a yokel directing travellers 
(‘left at the next village, then straight through the 
market-town’) on their way to Rājagaha.11
Look, here comes somebody who thinks he’s lost. 
‘Don’t worry, my friend,’ he assured, ‘you’re on your 
way. Just carry on till the road forks. That’s where you 
need to look sharp. Don’t turn left whatever you do. 
Take the right-hand fork, carefully tracking the path – 
hemmed in though it is by creepers from all sides. Hack 
your way through as best you can till you emerge on 
soggy ground. Then test each step. Keep your eyes on 
your feet. A vast swamp lies ahead.’ (Gradually, the trail 
has become more and more sinister and surreal, faintly 
reminiscent of something out of H. Rider Haggard or 
Tolkien.) ‘Keep circling round,’ the directions continue, 
‘skirting that treacherous edge, until the path climbs 
over a ridge with sheer drops on either side. A bit 
further on you’ll discover a delightful stretch of level 
ground.’12
It’s a spiritual adventure, of course, not a boy’s 
adventure at all. Without a moment’s pause the Buddha 
decodes his own text: ‘I’ve made up this allegory, Tissa, 
to help you understand. Its key is this: the traveller who 
“thinks he’s lost” is Everyman (Puthujjana ) himself; he 
who “knows the way” is the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the 
Fully Self-Enlightened One; the “road-fork” is the state

164
THE BROKEN GONG
of wavering, of uncertainty; the “left-hand path” is the 
false path of Wrong View and of Wrong Concentration; 
the “right-hand path” is the Noble Eightfold Path of 
Right View and of Right Concentration. The “creepers” 
denote ignorance; the “vast swamp” denotes lusts 
of the flesh; the “sheer drops”, or precipices, denote 
anger and despair; and the “delightful stretch of level 
ground” denotes nibbāna. Cheer up, Tissa, cheer up! 
I’m here to advise, help and teach you.’
The journey has turned into a mini-Pilgrim’s Progress, 
with its own Slough of Despond, etc. For to lose one’s 
way is metaphorically to lose the Magga, or Path,
or Pada.
Take another scenario shuffling the same three 
props (of jungle, swamp and paths) into a very different 
configuration: ‘At the foot of a forested range, home 
to a herd of deer, spread a low-lying swamp. Suppose 
someone blocked their safe approach to the swamp 
and malevolently blazed a false trail, even planting a 
dummy roe and doe as a trap. Then suppose someone 
else, with their welfare at heart, reopened the safe 
descent, closed up the false trail and destroyed those 
twin decoys.’13
It’s the merest sketch but again, without time to 
draw breath, a long table of equivalences is appended:
the low-lying swamp sensual desire
the herd of deer human beings
the malevolent trapper Māra, the Evil One
the false trail the wrong Eightfold Path
the dummy decoys ignorance, delight and lust

165
HAROLD BEAVER
the benevolent volunteer the Tathāgata,
 Arahant and Fully
 Enlightened One
the safe approach the Noble Eightfold Path
Fiction defamiliarizes the commonplace: thus its 
attendant charge of excitement. Allegory, with its 
familiar maps and keys, merely reconfirms the human 
norm: thus the attendant twinge of disappointment, 
since its solutions invariably seem too pat. Good fiction, 
like life itself, remains ever open to rereading and 
reinterpretation, while allegory (for readers like us) 
too firmly controls the options. In literary terms, that 
is, these allegories seem too glib, levelling their own 
more arresting features (the swamp, the precipices 
or decoys) in the course of explication. They wear a 
too-finished look like a filled-in crossword; and like 
completed crosswords, they seem disposable.
The Buddha’s audience, though, were not readers. 
They were not even literate, let alone literary. That’s 
why his habitual response to questions of interpretation 
was not to fuse context with commentary, but to 
displace one set of signs (the story) with another 
disparate set; or, put another way, displace the original 
language of narration by a metalanguage of secondorder signs. Whether stories, scenarios or similes, all 
subtexts embedded in the Buddha’s texts tend to be 
treated allegorically as if their masked message or 
meaning could be exposed and fragmented word for 
word; as if their fictitious matter could thereby be 
simultaneously dissolved, dismantled and disintegrated.

166
THE BROKEN GONG
For allegory, thus comprehended, posed no threat.
It became, in a word, self-cancelling. That is why the 
Buddha thought it so good for him, and all his auditors, 
to think in allegorical terms: first, it restrained papañca, 
or proliferating imagination; second, it controlled 
interpretation; third, it traced a sustained line of 
thought without surplus, without some mysterious 
residue of meaning; fourth, it was omniscient, flooding 
a text, or image, with total enlightenment.
*  *  *
Mental states, though, by their very nature, differ 
from all other phenomena in our experience; and the 
Buddha’s most elaborate schema of linked similitudes 
concerned the mind. Each step, or aspect, of insight 
meditation (vipassanā ) was at some point assigned its 
own appropriate analogy for which a detailed jigsaw 
of correspondences hardly seemed appropriate. Such 
cameos necessarily became more expressionistic, as 
aids to meditation.
In that walled and fortified frontier post, a watchful 
sāti (mindfulness) was clearly designed as keeper of 
the single gate. 14 Zen masters, in consequence, have 
called it the ‘Gateless Gate’, that paradoxical entry into 
vipassanā whose sole password is the breath:15
‘With entire mindfulness he breathes in; and with 
entire mindfulness he breathes out. Breathing in a 
long inhalation, he is conscious of breathing in a long 
inhalation, or breathing out a long exhalation, he is

167
HAROLD BEAVER
conscious of breathing out a long exhalation. Breathing 
in a short inhalation, he is conscious of breathing in a 
short inhalation, or breathing out a short exhalation, he 
is conscious of breathing out a short exhalation. He trains 
himself to be clearly conscious of the whole stretch of the 
in-coming breath at its beginning, its middle and its end. 
He trains himself to be clearly conscious of the whole 
stretch of the out-going breath at its beginning, its middle 
and its end ... Bhikkhus, just as a skilful turner or turner’s 
apprentice knows a long pull [on the string turning his 
lathe] when a long pull is made or knows a short pull when 
a short pull is made ...’16
It’s a skill. Like an apprentice, it needs training, 
practice, sustained control, else a buzz of ideas – amid a 
steady patter of verbal debris and sensory impressions 
– will continue to tease and detain the would-be 
meditator loitering outside the walls. Once inside the 
Gateless Gate, however, everything grows increasingly 
rarified, radiant, calm:
‘True, mindfulness may occasionally lapse, letting 
destructive flashbacks slip through, but a meditator soon 
learns how to neutralize and foresake such distractions in 
much the same way as someone sprinkling a few drops of 
water into a hot iron pan will soon see that water evaporate 
and vanish ...’17
All three of the mental conditions through which the 
meditator next passes – as well as the twelfth and last – 
will be given liquid expression: not as an alien element 
now to be evaporated, but as a vital, circulating fluid 
drenching and suffusing the inner life:18

168
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Great King! It’s just as when a bath-attendant, or his 
assistant, strews bath-powder into a brass bowl, gradually 
sprinkling it with water and kneading the moist mass until 
it sets. The water permeating that cake of soap, while 
suffusing it with unguents, remains unable to seep out.’
‘Great King! It’s just as when a deep lake, without inlets 
from either north or south or east or west, is replenished 
by water from a spring below. Despite only light and 
irregular rains, cool water welling up from that spring will 
soak, drench and permeate the whole until not a patch of 
the lake is not suffused.’
‘Great King! It’s just as when blue or red or white lotuses 
grow submerged in a pond. They thrive under water – 
soaked, drenched and permeated from root to tip in cool 
water – until no part of any plant is not suffused.’
A bhikkhu elsewhere had been defined as one 
‘bathed with the inner bathing’; and the secretion 
in which he is immersed can now be diagnosed as 
water soaking into soap-powder, or a cool spring 
gushing from the floor of a lake, or a pond in which 
lotuses are steeped and nourished. 19 All three images 
conjure up scenes of delicious, tingling bliss, though 
this is ‘pleasure that has nothing to do with sensual 
desires’.20 It is pleasure in renunciation, in seclusion 
and absorption. It is pleasure in a ritual purification 
of a kind. It is ‘unremitting pleasure’ 21 nevertheless, 
to which the Buddha remained uncompromisingly 
committed: ‘to be repeated and to be developed and to 
be cultivated; one should not be afraid of such pleasure, 
I say.’22

169
HAROLD BEAVER
Such is the joy of these meditative flights, soaring 
from trance to trance, until attaining the fourth and 
final jhāna:
‘Great King! It’s just as when a man sits wrapped from 
head to toe in a white sheet that leaves not a patch of flesh 
exposed.’
As if, all along, we had never left the baths! For if that 
ball of lather anticipated the delights of soaking, this 
sheeted – possibly towelled – figure, generating and 
harbouring its own heat, chastely closes the bathhouse sequence.
The Venerable Khemaka, for his own purposes, 
transposed the setting from a bath-attendant’s stall to 
a dhobi-wallah’s tank:
‘Friends, it’s like a soiled cloth handed by its owner to a 
washerman who rubs out the stains with saltpetre, or lye, 
or cow-dung, and then rinses the cloth in fresh water till 
it’s thoroughly clean. Though a faint whiff of saltpetre, 
or lye, or cow-dung, may well still linger. Back at home, 
therefore, the owner will carefully stow it in an aromatic 
box until even the smell clinging to it has utterly faded.’ 23
Even when the last remnant of ego-conceit is dissipated, 
that is, something vulgar persists. The very effort 
of self-cleansing and self-purification leaves its own 
ineradicable pong. It’s a secondary attribute – itself a 
mark of cleanliness – but, like bleach or detergent, it 
too must be given time to evaporate and vanish.
Thus finally humidified, insulated, cleansed and 
rested, as it were, the meditator achieves vipassanā:

170
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Great King! It’s just as when a jeweller, placing a beryl 
on his outstretched palm, lifts it up to his eyes. Carefully 
examining it, he reflects: “Yes, it’s genuine, all right. Wellcut. Strung on a multicoloured thread, yet flawless in every 
respect: brilliant, transparent, eight-faceted, crystal-clear.”’
At this crisis of ‘insight’ the allegorical subtext (for 
all its colourful ‘threads’) becomes equally clear. For 
what is this beryl other than the Triple Gem whose 
eightfold facets reflect the Noble Eightfold Path? What 
can it be but the flawless gem of the Buddha/Dhamma/
Sangha? The match is explicit. As explicit as the geology 
of that lake (with the subaqueous spring) whose flowchart duplicated the psychic ‘flow’ cooling the surface 
warmth of meditative practice.
*  *  *
It’s at this critical juncture that six further 
supernatural forces arise, given more prominence in 
the Tibetan than Theravāda tradition. But their moral 
value remains mysterious.24 As does their psychological 
role despite the bright labels attached: a stalk of grass 
drawn from its sheath, or sword from its scabbard, 
or snake from its slough (for a mentally-generated 
body); the artistry of potters, or ivory-carvers, or 
goldsmiths (for psychic power); the throb of tabors and 
kettledrums on a highway (for psychic hearing); the 
day-to-day log of a village tour (for the recollection of 
past lives); a 360° rooftop panorama at a crossroads (for 
psychic sight).25

171
HAROLD BEAVER
Only one illustration (for the penetration of 
other minds) opens up a new, strange and visionary 
dimension:
‘Great King! It’s just as when a girl or boy, in a fit of vanity, 
puts on make-up. They peer closely into a mirror, or bowl of 
clear water, to examine their face. “There’s a pimple,” they 
cry on spotting some flaw in the skin, or “Not a blackhead 
today!” if there’s none.’
Such intensity reaches beyond mere illustration. Such 
Hindu narcissism – so self-involved that it scans every 
pore – seems expressly designed to penetrate the 
façade of image and identity.
Piercing that self-reflection prepares for the twelfth 
and final tableau:
‘Great King! It’s just as when a keen-sighted traveller in 
the mountains gazes from the bank of an upland lake 
into water so crystal-clear that he can see the fish darting 
about in shoals and shells and bars of gravel and pebbles 
and molluscs and bits of broken pottery scattered across 
the floor.’
Unlike a mirror, this lake is really and truly transparent. 
No longer distorted or shrouded by egotistical desires, 
every shell, every pebble is observed exactly for what 
it is. The translucence is not so much outward (in the 
world) as inward (in a mind emptied of clutter), where 
all is resolved into a pellucid, all-encompassing vision 
of the everyday at which – like a Zen poet – one can 
merely point, affirming ‘fish ... pebbles ... shells ... bits 
of broken pottery...’

172
THE BROKEN GONG
On that blunt affirmation succeeds a mood of ease 
and utter relaxation, as if leaving those uplands for the 
humid plain in the heat of the dry season, a parched 
and exhausted traveller, descending a flight of steps 
into a pool near a clump of trees, plunges in among the 
lotus flowers to bathe and drink his fill; then crosses 
over to the trees to lie full length in their shade.26
Such moments of freedom are always connected 
with the sight of clear and limpid water. As in that 
lesson of the five bowls of water, bound to disturb the 
Narcissus image, being either discoloured (by dye), 
or bubbling (on the boil), or scummy (with algae), 
or ruffled (by wind), or cloudy (with sediment). Only 
crystal-clear water returns no distorting reflection. 
Yielding no reflection at all!27
It is an absence (of self), then, that makes such 
presence (of molluscs and gravel) magically possible. 
Confirmed elsewhere by a sketch as formalized as a 
diagram in a physics textbook:
‘“Monks, imagine a pavilion with a peaked roof and a 
window to the east. At sunrise, when the sun’s rays strike 
through that window, what do they rest on?” 
“On the western wall, Lord.”
“Just so, monks ...”’28
The void (suññatā) cannot be described, only evoked 
through the eyes, the ‘windows’ of the mind behind 
which the Buddha momentarily suspends this threedimensional space. An invisible space, like an empty 
attic, yet as precisely determined as Nāgasena’s sign of 
the reaper; but this time the effect of his unexpected

173
HAROLD BEAVER
question and that equally unexpected answer proves 
far more startling. The morning sun, whose first 
rays flash unimpeded from an eastern window to the 
opposite wall, has become a glimpse of the selfless 
life as an uncannily experienced, luminous, almost 
palpable event in its own right.
Put another way – and clearly the Buddha was at 
pains to express this negative insight in positive terms 
– it is ‘just as though a bull’s hide were freed from folds 
by stretching it with a hundred pegs.’ 29 So a bhikkhu, 
as it were, pegs out his ‘perception of earth’, voiding 
it of all contingency (‘hillocks and hollows, rivers 
and ravines, thorny and rock-strewn waste’), neither 
abstracting it exactly, nor symbolizing it, but tautening 
and tightening it until he can mentally register 
its residual gestalt, as we might say, as an insistent 
presence. Continuing to rarify his perceptions in this 
way from infinite space to infinite consciousness, he 
may eventually reach ‘the signless concentration of 
mind’ (Samādha-nimittā), which is the pre-condition of 
total liberation.
And what is the telltale sign of this uncanny state of 
total self-liberation? Once, by moonlight in the Gosinga 
Sāla Forest, with the scent of blossoms heady in the air, 
Sāriputta expressed it this way:
‘Imagine a king’s, or king’s minister’s, chest so packed with 
gorgeous robes that morning, noon or night, he can pick 
out whatever he feels like wearing, at a whim, at any time. 
In just the same way, a monk, who has mastered his own 
mind, can attain any level of awareness he chooses and 
rest there at will at any time.’30

174
THE BROKEN GONG
Inner transparency, then, implies freedom to 
choose. Like an actor trying on a role. For like an actor’s, 
a monk’s task is one of an ever-shifting attention 
without attachment, without ever becoming anything 
fixed or permanent at all. Just as water, in Freud’s 
image, can fill any vessel, without retaining the form of 
any. Knock! It’s as if no one were there!
*  *  *
Such a leisured accretion of images stands in marked 
contrast to a ten-item sequence, evoking carnal lusts, 
whose bewildering transformations are enumerated as 
being like bare bones; a lump of flesh; a torch of straw; 
a pit of burning coals; a dream; borrowed goods; a fruitbearing tree; a slaughterhouse; a palisade of swords; a 
snake’s head. As image collapses into image, one might 
well ask: why this quick-fire multiplication of terms? 
What unites such a protean list? In what respect are 
dreams, or slaughterhouses, or fruit-bearing trees, like 
cravings, let alone sensual cravings? Such shock tactics 
seem to imply that the essential stability of all metaphor 
is at risk. At this rate of instant attrition, in an endless 
metabolism, what valid significance can ever be found 
in ‘sensual cravings’?
That list occurs in the Alagaddūpama Sutta, yet its 
first seven items are a recapitulation of seven narrative 
vignettes, deployed in exactly the same sequence, 
in the Potaliya Sutta.31 The question is: which group 
derived from which? Or which predated which? Did

175
HAROLD BEAVER
the ten linked similes constitute the original? Or the 
seven linked narratives? Oral transmission, I believe, 
was more likely to contract than to expand such 
disparate elements; the straw torch and mysterious 
tree become intelligible only as kernels, or remnants, 
or memos, of familiar stories. 32 Far from signs in some 
symbolic order, the ten similes become persuasive only 
as impromptu markers to a well-known repertoire. 
Priority, then, must be given to the narrative chain.
That chain is arranged in three pairs with the seventh 
(the ‘fruit-bearing tree’) as odd man out.33 The first pair 
concerns meat: a dog at the butcher’s and birds of prey. 
The second pair concerns heat: a grass torch borne 
against the wind and a charcoal-burner’s pit. The third 
pair concerns mirages: the pastoral illusions of a dream 
and the economic delusions of a loan. But what of the 
exception which, stripped of attendant fiction, proves 
exceptionally enigmatic?
Its setting is an orchard outside some town or village. 
Imagine a tree blossoming there with none of its petals 
yet scattered on the ground.34 Add two wanderers from 
afar – both obsessed by flowers – only one of whom, 
however, is adroit enough to climb the tree. While he 
is busy clambering into the branches, therefore, the 
other pulls out an axe and starts hacking away at the 
roots. What do you think? Shouldn’t the man in the 
tree scramble down as fast as he can to avoid breaking 
a hand, or a foot, or an arm when the tree falls?
This is clearly a cautionary tale. Going after sensual 
pleasures (blossoms) is always a risky, frivolous

176
THE BROKEN GONG
business in which one is likely to be caught off guard 
and trapped in a precarious ambush. The lesson hardly 
needs spelling out: DO NOT RISK LIFE AND LIMB FOR 
SUCH FRAGILE TREASURE. The whole set echoes similar 
cautions:
‘Suppose a half-starved dog, haunting a slaughterhouse, 
were tossed a blood-smeared bone without a scrap of 
meat sticking to it. What do you think? Would gnawing that 
cast-off bone appease his hunger?’
‘Suppose a vulture, or kite, or crow, snatching a chunk 
of meat, were already airborne when attacked by other 
birds flapping up to peck and claw it. What do you think? 
Wouldn’t lockjaw be suicidal?’
‘Suppose someone lit a grass torch and ran with it flaring 
into the wind. What do you think? Wouldn’t the torch soon 
scorch his hand, or arm, or some other part?’
‘Suppose two ruffians were dragging their victim towards a 
charcoal-pit – deep as they were tall and glowing without 
smoke or flame. What do you think? Though his arms were 
pinned down, wouldn’t he desperately flail about from 
side to side?’
‘Suppose a dreamer in a dream saw delectable parks 
and groves and meadows and lakes which vanished, on 
waking, into thin air. What do you think?’
‘Suppose a farmer – having signed a hire-purchase 
agreement for a carriage and jewelled earrings –
proceeded to the marketplace for the pleasure of
attracting stares and overhearing: “Yes, sir, he’s stinking 
rich!” “Why, didn’t you know he was loaded?” “That’s 
how the rich indulge themselves!” But when the 
true owners call in their loans, what do you think?’

177
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Suppose there was an orchard with a tall tree all in 
blossom, with none of its flowers yet fallen to the ground 
... What do you think?’
Suppose! Suppose! Suppose! These are all pragmatic 
illustrations to plunge the listener into realistic, 
psychologically-testing predicaments, whether drawn 
from human or animal life; and the unspoken warning 
is a repeated, thudding: DO NOT GNAW BARE BONES! DO 
NOT IMITATE VULTURES! DO NOT RUN WITH A TORCH 
INTO THE WIND! KEEP WELL AWAY FROM FIERY PITS! 
DON’T DREAM! DON’T MAKE-BELIEVE! ... There’s no 
need for further explication. It’s only when reduced 
to pseudo-comparisons that the list seems to require 
a composite reading, as if the Buddha, like the Jesus of 
Mark’s Gospel, were teasing his audience into missing 
the point: ‘that seeing they may see, and not perceive; 
and hearing they may hear, and not understand.’ 35 But 
that was never the Buddha’s way.
*  *  *
The Buddha taught a peculiar gnosis (as the Greeks 
would have called it) without ever being the least 
gnostically enigmatic. Gnosis implied more than simply 
‘knowledge’; something closer to ‘insight’ perhaps, 
or ‘intuitive awareness’. In the words of one Gnostic 
master: ‘Abandon the search for the sources of creation 
and other matters of that sort ... Learn what it is within 
you, which makes everything its own, saying: “My 
mind, my thought, my soul, my body.”’36

178
THE BROKEN GONG
Such beliefs constituted Christian heresy as much 
as Buddhist teaching constituted Hindu heresy. For 
both taught that the ‘divine’ condition was universally 
immanent. Both were concerned with abandoning 
illusion and embracing enlightenment, guided not so 
much by a God, or prophet of God, as a spiritual mentor. 
According to the Gospel of Thomas:
‘Jesus said: “If you bring forth what is within you, what you 
bring forth will save you. If you do not bring forth what is 
within you, what you do not bring forth will destroy you.”’
‘Jesus said: “He who will drink from my mouth will become 
as I am. I myself shall be he and things that are hidden will 
be revealed to him.”’37
These ‘things that are hidden’ (apocrypha), however, 
were limited to the ‘few’, as opposed to the ‘many’ 
orthodox devotees, just as Buddhists for centuries 
formed a minority within Vedantic Brahmanism. Even 
the ur-evangelist, Mark, had his Jesus privately and 
tendentiously allegorizing a parable:38
‘And he said unto them, “Unto you it is given to know the 
mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are 
without, all these things are done in parables. That seeing 
they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may 
hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be 
converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.”’39
The hidden key to the charade on this reading was 
reserved for his (singularly obtuse) disciples; ‘outsiders’ 
being fobbed off with parables.

179
HAROLD BEAVER
Yet only two other allegorical interpretations were 
directly attributed to Jesus by an evangelist; 40 and 
this awkward attempt by the early Church to decode 
a handful of texts was largely – or now is generally 
agreed to be – a Hellenistic aberration. 41 The Kingdom 
of Heaven, as proclaimed by Jesus, was everywhere 
on open offer, not mysteriously hidden from Jews or 
non-Jews. It was proclaimed in parables to enforce the 
critical commitment involved, not as esoteric vehicles 
for mystification.42
Certainly the Buddha was not esoteric in Mark’s 
sense, though he withheld (for bhikkhus only) certain 
practices and aspects of his teaching considered too 
advanced for laymen. Nor was his teaching divisive, 
therefore, in the Gnostic way. ‘The Dhamma I have 
taught,’ he made explicit, ‘has no secret and public 
versions. There is no “teacher’s closed fist” about 
good things here.’ 43 The message was universal. Nor 
did his disciples ever think to ask why he used the art 
of allegory. Had they done so, one thing is certain: he 
would never have assured them that they, as privileged 
acolytes, could share the mystery of nibbāna, while the 
uninitiated would have to make do with picturesque 
ephemera, mere narrative appetizers or childish tittletattle. Nor is the modern fascination with ‘divinatory’ 
or ‘oracular’ or ‘spiritual’ texts in the least germane. 
Those who look to the suttas for fractured surfaces and 
enigmatic displacements look in vain. The Buddha had 
no secret allegories on offer. Step by step everything 
was elucidated; and his parables were part of this 
process of elucidation.

180
THE BROKEN GONG
*  *  *
Even that sevenfold sequence (of bone, meat, torch, 
pit, dream, loan, tree) may, after all, be allegorically 
linked. Though not cryptographic exactly, with every 
dog or vulture – like those swamps and jungle-paths 
– signalling hidden meanings; yet allegory may still 
be implied by the concatenation as a whole. For an 
overriding truth emerges, clearly binding all members 
of the series: it’s a matter of LETTING GO, just as the 
vulture will have to let go its chunk of meat. The 
whole series is keyed to the notion of paṭinissagga (or 
‘relinquishing’) under threat of pain: the dog will have to 
abandon that bone despite his hunger; the kite, or crow, 
under aerial attack, will have to release its snatched 
morsel; the torch-carrier will have to drop the blazing 
grass; the kidnapped victim must discontinue writhing 
at the very edge of the pit; the dreamer, on awakening, 
will have to foresake his dream; the borrower will have 
to stop role-playing; the climber will have to desert his 
tree ... These are all moral lessons and their settings are 
microcosms of the Buddhist view of the world as a stage 
for human craving (meat), self-consuming rage (heat) 
and delusion (a mirage or dream). 44 It was precisely 
because of their cumulative effect in the first place that 
these parables were reducible to a mnemonic list.
But a question remains: if Jesus taught principally 
by means of parables rather than allegories, is the 
term ‘parable’ applicable at all to the Buddha’s longer 
narratives? In what way are his ‘parables’ like the

181
HAROLD BEAVER
Parable of the Talents, say, or of the Unforgiving 
Servant, or of the Unjust Steward, or of the Labourers 
in the Vineyard, or of the Wicked Husbandmen, or of 
the Good Samaritan, or of the Ten Virgins, or of the 
Prodigal Son? 45 Certainly translators have used the 
term:
‘Well, Prince, consider this parable, since lessons are often 
more readily absorbed by means of parables.’46
‘A parable, monks, I gave to you that you may grasp the 
meaning of the matter.’47
‘Parable’ derives from the Greek word ‘parabolē’, 
often translated simply as ‘comparison’. Literally, it 
means ‘placing one thing next to another’; so in classical 
Greek it could also mean an ‘illustration’ or ‘analogy’. 
But in the Septuagint it is further used as an equivalent 
to the Hebrew term ‘mashal’ , meaning ‘riddle’ or ‘dark 
saying’, which potentially confuses the issue. 48 Skating 
over such opaque connotations as irrelevant here, I 
see no obstacle to endorsing a number of the Buddha’s 
stories as generic ‘parables’. Precisely what number 
though? And how are they to be distinguished from his 
allegories?
In common with most Old Testament and rabbinical 
parables, New Testament parables (in the words of C. 
H. Dodd) present ‘one single point of comparison’. 49 
They differ from allegories, then, in proliferating data 
for their overall plausibility rather than programming 
each detail for its ‘independent significance’. Parables 
never argue, though they may suggest the character

182
THE BROKEN GONG
of an argument. Jesus mainly used them, it seems, to 
shock and shift his listeners’ attitudes. In this they were 
more like exemplary tales, inviting not interpretation 
so much as personal intervention. They spring a trap. 
‘Each parable,’ in Dodd’s words, ‘entices the hearer 
to a judgement upon the situation depicted, and then 
challenges him, directly or by implication, to apply 
that judgment’ to the crisis at hand. 50 Their summons 
being: ‘Go, and do thou likewise.’51
In fact, Jesus was elaborating an age-old Hebrew 
tradition (of the Haggadah and Midrash), in the 
spirit of that parable from the Book of Samuel where 
Nathan told David the story of a poor man’s ewe-lamb 
expropriated by a rich man. Which slily sprung the 
trap. Appalled, David exclaimed: ‘As the Lord liveth, 
the man that hath done this thing shall surely die.’ And 
the trap snapped. Pouncing, the Prophet thundered: 
‘THOU ART THE MAN!’52
That is why Jesus, like the Buddha before him, so 
often hammered out the refrain:
‘What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep ...’
‘What do you think? A man had two children ...’ 
‘Which now of these three do you think was a neighbour 
to the man ...?’
Or framed his parables with bantering questions:
‘Do you bring in a lamp to put it under the meal-tub or 
under the bed?’
‘When you sow a field, do you expect every seed to come 
up?’

183
HAROLD BEAVER
‘What was the spectacle that drew you to the wilderness? 
A reed-bed swept by the wind? ... A man dressed in silks 
and satins?’
While ominously postponing a summing-up:
‘Which of the two did his father’s will?’ 
‘What did these men deserve?’
‘What then shall the owner of the vinyard do?’
For Jesus came as a missionary, not theologian. He 
was concerned more with the quality of life than our 
understanding of it. His parables neither imply nor 
depict a frozen Byzantine kingdom. They are never 
didactic but prompt a way of living, of learning, of 
loving, of spontaneously acting.
In this broad sense, neither riddling nor overtly 
allegorical, that sevenfold series (beginning with a 
butcher’s dog and ending with a fruit-tree) may even 
finally be classed as ‘parable’; for each is a cautionary 
tale told to initiate a decisive shift of conduct. In 
that large sense, the Buddha told numerous parables 
inviting judgment (‘Suppose!’ ‘Suppose!’) on imagined 
situations. Two of the finest (the Parable of the Raft and 
that of the Bamboo-Acrobats) I shall discuss in Chapter 
9. Here I shall conclude with three: the Parable of the 
Sower, the Parable of the Chariot-Relay and the Parable 
of the Māluva-Creeper.
*  *  *
Rumours must have spread that Jesus disclosed 
richer and subtler mysteries when (privately) teaching

184
THE BROKEN GONG
his disciples than when (publicly) addressing mass 
audiences; and similar suspicions clearly plagued 
the Buddha. As this dialogue with a village headman  
suggests:53
HEADMAN: ‘Isn’t the Blessed One filled with compassion 
for all living beings?’ 
THE BUDDHA: ‘Indeed, Headman, the Tathāgata is filled 
with compassion for all living beings.’
HEADMAN: ‘Well then, Lord, why does the Blessed One 
teach the Dhamma more fully to some than to others?’54
A momentary pause must have ensued while the 
Buddha considered his options; for he could neither 
accept, nor not accept, the implications. Then, instead 
of answering head-on, he veered off into another, 
seemingly inconsequential, line of enquiry:
THE BUDDHA: ‘I shall reply to you, Headman, with a 
counter-question. Answer as you see fit. Now what do 
you think? Suppose a farmer owned three fields: one firstclass, one average, one with poor, sandy, brackish soil. Tell 
me, when it came to sowing, which of the three would the 
farmer sow first? That first-class field? Or the field that’s soso? Or the one with poor, sandy, brackish soil?’
The advantage of this ploy was that it committed an 
interlocutor to a prior answer. For, unobserved by the 
headman, the Buddha had surreptitiously shifted the 
terms of debate from quality of treatment to priority of 
treatment. The shift went unnoticed since, like Socrates 
(but without a hint of Socratic irony), the Buddha had 
led the debate on to the villager’s home ground. Here 
was something on which every peasant considered

185
HAROLD BEAVER
himself expert. The answer was self-evident. Without 
a moment’s hesitation, the headman dived straight in:
HEADMAN: ‘Lord, the farmer would sow his best field first. 
That done, he’d sow the middling field next. As to the one 
with poor, sandy, brackish soil, he mightn’t sow it at all. Or, 
then again, he might. Just for cattle-feed.’
Now, item by item, the Buddha could explicate 
that reply not so much as an allegorical code, but as 
a restatement of the headman’s practical proposal in 
terms of the Buddha’s unique practical mission:
THE BUDDHA: ‘Well, Headman, that first-class field is 
like my bhikkhus and bhikkhunis.55 To them I teach the 
Dhamma which is lovely in its beginning, lovely in its 
middle and lovely in its ending, both in spirit and in letter; 
I proclaim the holy life in all its purity and perfection. Why? 
Because they embrace me as their island, their shelter, 
their stronghold, their refuge.
‘The average field is like my male and female layfollowers.56 To these, too, I teach the Dhamma which is 
lovely in its beginning, lovely in its middle and lovely in its 
ending, both in spirit and in letter; I proclaim the holy life in 
all its purity and perfection. Why? Because they embrace 
me as their island, their shelter, their stronghold, their 
refuge.
‘The poor, sandy field, with brackish soil, is like the 
wandering recluses and Brahmans of other sects. To them 
also I teach the Dhamma which is lovely in its beginning, 
lovely in its middle and lovely in its ending, both in spirit 
and in letter; I proclaim the holy life in all its purity and 
perfection. Why? Since only understanding a single phrase 
would be to their enduring profit’ .

186
THE BROKEN GONG
Though conceived as allegory, the Buddha is not 
really speaking in allegory, but in a paradigm already 
expounded by – and so wholly comprehensible to – 
his interlocutor. There is even a residual surplus, or 
excess, in the headman’s reply, ignored in the Buddha’s 
reworking, that gives a semblance of truth to the 
whole exchange, as well as subtly differentiating the 
two speakers. For the Buddha is available on an equal 
footing, he insists, to all his followers and interlocutors 
(including this village headman, incidentally). He 
repeats his religious programme, in identical set terms, 
three times: ‘To them I teach the Dhamma ... To these, 
too, I teach the Dhamma ... To them also I teach the 
Dhamma ...’ He is no elitist, he emphasizes. Even when 
confronted by hecklers, he persists, since ‘a single 
phrase’ could be ‘to their enduring profit’. If anyone’s 
scepticism is exposed, it is that of the headman, who 
dismisses the third field out of hand – except (maybe) 
for cattle-fodder.
Is it simply a matter of precedence, then, that 
monks are served first, laity second, outsiders third? 
Everyone, after all, gets their due. The moral strikes me 
as far more profound: that in everyday life we may well 
standardize performances into alpha, beta or gamma 
(first-class, middling or poor); but in the holy life there 
can be no categorizations of that kind. Potentiality, 
in all its fullness, is present everywhere at all times. 
It was the headman, in posing the original question, 
who thought in terms of grades and classifications: 
what is full, what not so full; careful and not so careful;

187
HAROLD BEAVER
thorough and not so thorough. While ever conscious 
of individual qualifications, the Buddha treats all
people alike.
The headman’s confusion, it seems, was grounded 
in a quandary. From an initial premise (that ‘a Blessed 
One is filled with compassion for all living beings’), 
supported by a second (that ‘whoever has compassion 
treats all living beings alike’), he had logically
concluded, to his own satisfaction, that ‘the Blessed 
One should treat all men and women alike’. This 
syllogism, implicit in his original interrogation, as well 
as his fluency in agricultural matters, make clear that 
he particularly prided himself on his shrewdness.
But the Buddha saw through him at a glance. What is 
more, he managed to turn that shrewdness to his own 
account, scrupulously rebutting his implied charge of 
elitism without high-handedness, without a hint of 
obvious reproof: that is, without allowing the headman 
to lose face. It was just the kind of resentment, he 
knew, that a headman, conscious of his standing before 
the assembled village, was most likely to harbour. 
Just as it had been the headman’s social anxiety – this 
acute consciousness of his status – that had prompted 
his questions in the first place. Why else did he think 
that the Buddha would ration or classify his teaching 
to various grades of comprehension, to various levels 
of the listening public? Even if true, it was surely 
presumptuous for him even to consider questioning or 
criticising the Buddha’s choice of performance.

188
THE BROKEN GONG
But it is not only the psychological mastery which 
makes this case reminiscent of parable. It is also that 
surplus, that overlooked excess, which gives apparent 
life to the whole exchange. It is the unexpected ‘cattlefeed’ which the Buddha ignores – or, at least, seems 
not to pick up for his own purposes – that continues 
to prompt speculation. What sort of ‘excess’ is this? 
Is it unequivocally a fictional surplus? A dramatic 
redundancy? Or doesn’t the Buddha, in the end, 
perhaps slily recuperate it after all, by translating the 
headman’s dismissive shrug into quite another equally 
uncertain and unreliable ‘profit’?
*  *  *
This Parable of the Sower is immediately 
duplicated, with its ‘three fields’ transformed into 
‘three waterpots’. It’s as if the Buddha could promptly 
improvise variations by conjuring up random pots, of 
which one is neither cracked, nor porous, nor leaky; 
another is uncracked, but porous and leaky; while a 
third is cracked and porous and leaky.
Now the question is: which one would a householder 
prefer for storing water? Obviously (in order of 
choice) Pot One followed by Pot Two. Of Pot Three 
the headman judges he might – or again might not – 
pour in water: ‘At any rate, it would do for washingup.’ That is, if there were any water left. Just as it was 
problematic whether the sandy field could grow crops 
at all. The commercial or practical risk, the headman 
considers, is hardly worth taking. But he might take

189
HAROLD BEAVER
it as long as he can envisage a minimal gain. But the 
Buddha neither weighs commercial pros and cons nor 
practical considerations. For him, it is never a matter 
of investment in time and energy – of capital risk at 
all. He gives of himself out of abundance. ‘Why?’ he 
repeats, ‘If [those leaky, cracked and porous vessels] 
only understood a single phrase, it would be to their 
enduring profit.’
For the calculus of profit in the holy life is turned 
inside out and upside down. It neither classifies 
investment risks nor acts with any personal 
considerations of profit-taking in mind. Rather, it 
distributes profits – like seed, like water – universally, 
as universally available. Which is precisely what the 
Buddha had meant by ‘compassion’, that original bond 
of consensus on which his dialogue with the headman 
had been established.
*  *  *
Parable and allegory, then, run neck and neck. 
Similes can be plucked by the Buddha extempore 
out of thin air. But we should beware of squeezing 
cross-references too hard. Not everything need be 
analogously determined. If the three fields are too 
closely identified with the Buddha’s three audiences,
The first-class field constituting monks and nuns
The average field constituting male and female
 lay-followers
The poor, sandy field constituting wanderers and
 Brahmans of other sects,

190
THE BROKEN GONG
then awkward questions arise. Did monks and nuns 
consistently represent the most fertile soil for 
his Dhamma talks? Were they inevitably his most 
responsive and susceptible audience? Not at all. 
Monks could become slack and happy-go-lucky. Some 
disrobed, and others again spent decades of distracted 
effort without reaching enlightenment. While outsiders 
on occasion (like the leper Suppabuddha, or Bāhiya 
Dārucīriya, as we shall see) could reach enlightenment 
in a single bound. Read strictly as allegory, the Parable 
of the Sower, or of the Three Waterpots, becomes 
unpersuasive. The Buddha’s preferred mode, in all such 
cases, was an idiosyncratically mixed idiom.
Compare Jesus’s Parable of the Sower, as purveyed 
in the Gospel of Mark:
‘Behold, there went out a sower to sow: And it came to 
pass, as he sowed, some fell by the wayside, and the fowls 
of the air came and devoured it up. And some fell on stony 
ground, where it had not much earth; and immediately 
it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth: But when 
the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no 
root, it withered away. And some fell among thorns, and 
the thorns grew up, choked it, and it yielded no fruit. And 
others fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang 
and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some 
sixty, and some a hundred.’57
Not three experimental contexts here, but four: the 
footpath, the scree, the patch of thistles and a stretch 
of fertile soil. Read as parable, there’s no need to fuss 
over details. Only a ‘single point of comparison’ counts:

191
HAROLD BEAVER
the initial sowing followed by an abundant harvest. 
That harvest (the narrative confirms) will be all the 
more joyful for the degree of frustration and wasted 
labour involved.
Read as allegory, though, every detail must be 
brought into play: the stray seeds pecked by birds; 
those, unable to take root, which scorch; yet others 
choked by thorns. To exhaust such play, a notably 
clumsy and uncharacteristic gloss was put in
Jesus’s mouth:58
‘The sower soweth the word. And these are they by the 
wayside, where the word is sown; but when they have 
heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the 
word that was sown in their hearts. And these are they 
likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they 
have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness; 
and have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a 
time: afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for 
the word’s sake, immediately they are offended. And these 
are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the 
word, and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness 
of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke 
the word, and it becomes unfruitful. And these are they 
which are sown on good ground; such as hear the word, 
and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some 
sixty, and some a hundred.’
Once the seed becomes ‘the word’, each listener’s inner 
mood (obtuse, overenthusiastic, too easily discouraged) 
is illuminated and probed by different aspects of the 
rural scenario.

192
THE BROKEN GONG
The Buddha was fond, as we know, of elaborating 
such homilies; and allegories came readily to him. But 
his own Parable of the Sower was not one of them. It 
cannot be read either as straightforward parable or 
straightforward allegory. Nor can it be surgically sliced 
into parallel texts as Mark (followed by Matthew and 
Luke) managed to slice – however ineptly – Jesus’s 
Parable of the Sower.
*  *  *
The problem of plentitude or ‘excess’, circumvented 
here, is fully addressed elsewhere. Put in a nutshell, the 
answer is:
‘Bhikkhus, the Tathāgata has two ways of teaching. What 
two? The concise and the detailed. These are the two ways 
of teaching.’59
What the Buddha was too tactful to tell the headman 
to his face was that, as Tathāgata, he was always critically 
‘aware of the right time’ – the right occasion and right 
interlocutor, that is – ‘for explaining his speech’.60 Take 
the strange tale of the shipwrecked Bāhiya Dārucīriya, 
a kind of Hindu Robinson Crusoe dressed entirely 
in the bark of trees, who fell down at the Buddha’s 
feet – in mid-alms-round, on a roadside in Sāvatthi – 
crying: ‘Lord, let the Exalted One teach me Dhamma ... 
to my profit and welfare for long days to come!’ Twice 
he made his appeal and twice the Buddha patiently 
rejected him. But, at the third try, perhaps because his 
plea echoed the Buddha’s own terms – his very own

193
HAROLD BEAVER
phraseology – the Buddha relented, delivering this 
impromptu and masterly exposition of the Dhamma:
‘Thus, Bāhiya, you should train yourself: in what is seen, 
there is only the seen; in what is heard, there is only the 
heard; in what is sensed, only the sensed; in what is
thought, only the thought. Train yourself thus! And 
when in the seen nothing remains but sight, in the heard 
nothing but sound, in the sensed nothing but touch or 
smell or taste, in thinking nothing but thought, then for 
you, Bāhiya, there will be no “there”; when there is no 
“there” , Bāhiya, there will be no “here”; where there is 
no “here” , Bāhiya, there will be no next world; and since 
both extremes will have been eliminated, that indeed will
be the end of dukkha.’61
Shortly after, Bāhiya Dārucīriya (like the leper, 
Suppabuddha) was charged by a young bull and killed.62 
So the teaching, one might think, was not to his ‘longterm profit’ after all. But the Buddha, on his return 
round, seeing the dead body, instructed his monks to 
cremate it and build a cetiya (memorial stupa) over it. 
Curious, they wondered why. Because he had ‘passed 
to nibbāna’, the Buddha declared: ‘Foremost among 
my bhikkhus who are quick to learn the truth is Bāhiya 
Dārucīriya.’
With this minimal dose of teaching – in a Zen flash 
of satori, as it were – Bāhiya had ‘released his heart 
from the pollutions’. As concise as the discourse was 
the moment of his enlightenment; as instantaneous as 
his enlightenment had been the remainder of his life.
Such priority was surprising. ‘Lord’, the monks

194
THE BROKEN GONG
enquired, ‘you say Bāhiya Dārucīriya had attained 
Arahantship. When did he attain it?’
‘Bhikkhus, it was when he heard me teach the Dhamma.’ 
This was even more puzzling. How could they have 
missed that? When they were on their alms-round? 
In Sāvatthī? ‘But when did you teach the Dhamma to 
him?’
‘On the roadside, while I was making my alms-round.’ 
Really startled now, they asked: ‘Lord, was not the 
discourse you delivered by the roadside an extremely 
short one? How could he develop Final Knowledge 
after hearing so little?’
Their Teacher replied: ‘Bhikkhus, do not measure 
my Dhamma as being “little” or “much”. There is no 
virtue even in many thousands of stanzas. A single line 
of a stanza, containing the truth, is better.’
He might have been thinking of the headman, 
Asibandhakaputta. He, too, had measured the Dhamma 
quantitatively, like a shopkeeper or farmer, as being 
‘little’ or ‘much’, ‘full’ or ‘not so full’, ‘thorough’ or ‘not 
so thorough’. Both as teacher and artist, the Buddha 
knew that virtue never resided in sheer length. Nor in 
concision necessarily either. But concision is always 
possible; and used in the right way, at the right time, 
can be conclusive.
*  *  *

195
HAROLD BEAVER
Compared to some forty New Testament parables, 
rabbinical parables can be numbered in the thousands. 
Nor was the art of parable unique to the Buddha’s 
teaching either. As the following brain-teaser suggests:
‘Suppose King Pasenadi of Kosala, while at Sāvatthī, had 
some urgent business to transact at Sāketa. Suppose, 
too, that between Sāvatthī and Sāketa six coaches stood 
posted at regular intervals, ready-harnessed. Then 
mounting a coach at his palace door in Sāvatthī, he could 
make for a second coach; by dismounting and remounting 
at point A, he could reach a third coach; by dismounting 
and remounting at point B, he could reach a fourth coach; 
by dismounting and remounting at point C, he could 
reach a fifth coach; by dismounting and remounting at 
point D, he could reach a sixth coach; by dismounting and 
remounting at point E, he could reach a seventh coach; 
and from point F, by means of the seventh coach, he would 
arrive at his palace door in Sāketa. If asked, “Sire, did you 
travel by coach all the way from Sāvatthī?” how should the 
King reply?’
He should reply, of course: ‘Yes, I travelled by coach. 
But not in the same coach, no. Fresh horses were posted 
at each stage along the route. This is the last of a relay 
of seven coaches.’63
That ‘simile’ capped a dialogue between two monks 
on the purpose of the holy life. What was its ultimate 
goal? Was it to perfect purity of conduct? Or purity of 
mind? Or purity of belief? Or purity of faith? Or purity 
of insight in all its various forms? Each time the answer 
was ‘no’. Finally, the Venerable Sāriputta exclaimed:

196
THE BROKEN GONG
‘For what then, pray, is the holy life led?’ And the 
Venerable Mantāniputta (called Puṇṇa) replied: 
‘Brother, the holy life is led, under the Blessed One, 
that through detachment from things of heaven and 
earth, we may attain nibbāna.’
 It is an essential lesson which Sāriputta, oddly 
enough, had not assimilated in person from the Buddha: 
that neither purity of conduct, nor purity of mind, nor 
of belief, nor of faith, nor of insight, can ever be final 
goals in themselves:
‘For, brother, if the Blessed One had taught that nibbāna, 
whose essence is detachment, consisted of purity of 
conduct, or purity of mind, or purity of belief, or purity of 
faith, or purity of insight, he might just as well have taught 
that the essence of nibbāna is attachment!’64
On propounding this paradox, Mantāniputta 
introduced his Parable of the Seven Relays. Its purport, 
before decipherment even, was transparent: as purity 
of conduct leads to purity of mind, so purity of mind 
leads on to purity of belief, purity of belief to purity of 
faith, purity of faith to purity of insight ... which leads 
straight to the ultimate goal of detachment, or nibbāna.
Why not call it ‘allegory’, then, if relay by relay its 
meaning was so explicit? Because this is an ideal, an 
intellectual model at best, not a certified rule-book. The 
Buddha never taught that pure mind can be developed 
only by pure conduct, or pure belief only by pure mind, 
or pure faith only by pure belief, or pure insight only by

197
HAROLD BEAVER
pure faith. A coherent life consists of one journey, not 
seven short hauls. Moral progress cannot be chopped 
up in that way. Yes, the relays determine a normative 
sequence, or accretion, of moral attributes (which can 
hardly be faulted) as well as illuminating a final goal. 
But the lessons are practical. They issue a challenge. 
First: in the moral life there can be no shortcuts. Second: 
draw up a long-term plan. Third: always be prepared. 
Fourth: remember that your immediate aims, however 
overwhelming they seem, are only a means to an end 
and not the end itself.
*  *  *
Folklore, too, could be co-opted. As in the Parable 
of the Māluva-Creeper. This clinging vine is known in 
English as the ‘killer’ creeper. 65 At first no bigger than 
a toenail, its tendrils creep, supporting their weight 
on other plants. After a year, it has climbed a third of 
the way up the bole of a giant teak, or tamarind, or 
sandalwood, its stem still no rounder than an index 
finger. Within two years, it’s the size of a wrist and 
has reached the crown. Its enveloping stems are now 
as thick as a thigh, finally thicker than a waist. Their 
winding mesh squeezes the host, voraciously biting 
through the soft outer bark into the heartwood. 
Literally, the ‘killer’ strangles the tree to death, until 
monsoon rains send its immense joint weight lurching 
and crashing to the jungle floor.
The Buddha’s context for his vernacular tale is the 
overwhelming, crippling effect of sexual obsession, 
inexorably leading, once the least twinge of lust takes

198
THE BROKEN GONG
hold, to total, irretrievable breakdown. 66 It could 
be read as allegory, though the Buddha nowhere 
attempts his usual detailed, exhaustive explanation. If 
anything, it seems more like a practical demonstration, 
or proof even, that kamma accrues step by step with 
a quasi-genetic, biologically conditioned force of 
determination.
As in parable, too, a ‘single point of comparison’ is 
underscored by a single parallel phrasing: the ‘soft, 
tender, downy’ touch of a female embrace echoed by 
the ‘soft, tender, downy’ coils of the māluva-tendril. 
Nothing else is elaborated:67
‘Suppose late in the Dry Season, monks, just before the 
rains, the pod of a māluva-creeper burst open and a 
seed tumbled down to the foot of a tall Sāl tree. 68 Which 
immediately upset and alarmed its guardian-spirit. But 
friends and relatives (wood-sprites and garden-sprites, 
residing in neighbouring herbs and tree-tops) assembled 
to soothe him, saying: “Don’t be frightened, brother; 
there’s nothing to be frightened of. Most likely a peacock 
will gobble it up, or a deer will munch it, or a brush-fire 
consume it, or foresters find it, or white ants cart it off. 
Maybe it’s not even a seed at all; maybe it won’t ever 
germinate.”
‘But it so happened that the seed was not gobbled by a 
peacock, nor munched by a deer, nor consumed by a 
brush-fire, nor found by foresters, nor carted off by white 
ants. It really was a seed and really did germinate. Once 
clouds had gathered and the Rainy Season began, it 
rapidly shot up and its soft, tender, downy tendrils wound 
coiling round that tall Sāl tree.

199
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Then the tree-spirit wondered: “What exactly did my 
friends and relatives envisage when they assembled here 
to soothe and counsel me with their talk of peacocks and 
deer and brush-fires and foresters and white ants? All I 
know is that this creeper’s vines are altogether soft and 
tender and downy to the touch!”
‘Then the creeper encircled and embraced that Sāl tree, 
wrapping it tighter and tighter on all sides, until it hung like 
a canopy above, exerting such force that it crushed every 
branch and cracked and shattered its trunk.
‘Distraught, the tree-spirit exclaimed: “So that’s what my 
friends and relatives envisaged! That’s what they really 
foresaw when they soothed me with talk of peacocks and 
deer and brush-fires and foresters and white ants! One 
proposed it mightn’t even be a seed! Or if a seed, would 
never germinate! But, woe is me, owing to that one small 
seed, piercing pains are now racking my limbs through 
and through.”’
It’s a nicely judged, almost tragi-comic account, 
with the hamadryad at first suspicious, then 
alarmed, then socially reassured and lulled into cosy 
delusions of security, only to be finally discomfited, 
ravaged and exposed. 69 Though for us, rather, it 
may be the bizarre assumptions of the underlying 
thesis that are exposed: as if the sexual instinct, 
once awakened, were in some way parasitic on 
human development; and, left unchecked, must 
invariably spell our moral, and/or intellectual, and/
or physical doom. It is an apocalyptic threat. Just

200
THE BROKEN GONG
staying alert, in this context, cannot begin to be 
enough. In times of (perpetual) crisis, the parable 
insists, there is a need to be (perpetually) poised for a 
pre-emptive strike.

6
The tree-sprite’s lament may serve as a reminder not 
only of the Pali vernacular in which the Buddha taught 
(explored in Chapter 7), but of the ubiquitous veins of 
folklore which he co-opted (explored in Chapter 8). His 
parables were rooted in a rich, popular tradition, just as 
his imagery derived from the vast panorama of Indian 
life, ranging from towering Himalayan peaks to local 
flood-plains, dense jungle to the sacred Ganges, distant 
frontier posts to village clearings. Truly it can be said 
that the Buddha presented an unrivalled picture of 
Hindu peasant and merchant and court culture over 
two and a half thousand years ago – comparable, in 
scale and multitudinous detail, only to Homer.1
Unlike Homer, however, the Buddha cast himself 
as a protagonist of his own parables, adopting many 
guises. One such figure – invariably droll – was that of 
a children’s nanny, whose routines he rehearsed with a 
typically grim and earthy realism:

202
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Now, monks, suppose a baby was laid on its back; and 
while the nurse’s attention was distracted, it had popped 
a small twig or shard into its mouth. No sooner spotted, 
you’ll agree, but she’d remove that object; or, if she 
couldn’t, she’d grasp the baby’s head with her right hand, 
crooking her forefinger to extract it, even at the risk of 
drawing blood. A clumsy procedure, of course, and painful 
too – there’s no denying that – but in her flurry of concern 
she’d have no other option. She’d simply go ahead ... But 
once the baby was grown – once it had reached the age 
of reason – then the nurse could relax, knowing that the 
child can now look after itself, without perpetrating such 
blunders.’2
The rehearsal can even be re-enacted; or, vice versa, 
recycled from incident to parable. Nothing is fixed in 
this Canon. As here in Rājagaha:
‘Once, when Prince Abhaya was dandling a baby on his 
lap, the Blessed One asked him:
THE BUDDHA: “Prince, what do you think? Should your 
baby now poke a stick or pebble into his mouth without 
your noticing – or his nurse noticing – what’s the first thing 
you’d do?”
THE PRINCE: “I should quickly snatch it away, Venerable 
Sir. Or, if that proved too late, I’d grasp his head in my left  
hand and crooking the forefinger of my right, I’d prize it 
out, even if that meant drawing blood. Why? In a rush of 
anxiety for my own child.”
THE BUDDHA: “So, too, a Tathāgata, Prince, knows the 
critical moment for intervening, even where speech proves 
unwelcome and disagreeable.”’3

203
HAROLD BEAVER
In either case, the Buddha imaginatively sides with the 
nursemaid or nursing father.
Or rather, he identifies with the nurse. In fact, he 
is the nurse. 4 For the Buddha has to ‘look after’ his 
disciples while they are still babes in judgment; and 
such nursing care entails tailoring his talks to an 
infant class still enamoured of rhymes and toys and 
adventure-playgrounds. His tropes, in this sense, are 
adapted to childish faculties in a spiritual nursery 
school. Thus his infantile lines of enquiry:
‘Suppose someone were to chuck a stone ball at a pile 
of wet clay. What do you think? Would it smash right 
through?’5
‘Suppose someone were to hurl a ball of string at a 
hardwood door. What do you think? Would even a panel 
crack?’
Or take this madcap performance, evoking all the 
uproar of a kindergarten:
‘Suppose someone came along, holding a basket and 
hoe, with just one thought in mind: “I shall strip this great 
Earth of earth.” So he set to digging holes here and there, 
scattering sand here and there, spitting and urinating in 
all directions, continually chanting: “Vanish earth! Vanish 
earth!” What do you think? Could he strip this great Earth 
of earth?’6
How silly can you get! But what an inspired mess, 
all goo and pee and spit! Uproar in class! The Buddha’s 
parables are really toddlers’ tales for those newborns 
in the spiritual life. ‘And why?’ he rhetorically asked.

204
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Because, for the young, sense-pleasures are easily 
accessible.’ So too for monks, it seems. Though they 
have supposedly:
‘laid aside weapons ... abandoned sexual play ... given 
up gossip ... eat only once a day ... refrain from dancing, 
singing, music and theatrical shows ... abstain altogether 
from self-adornment with garlands, or scents, or cosmetics 
... hold aloof from couches (high as well as low) ... from 
accepting gifts of gold or silver ... from running of errands 
... from cheating with weights and measures ... from 
trafficking in male or female slaves ... from owning sheep, 
goats, poultry, pigs, elephants, cattle, stallions and mares, 
ploughed fields and grazing land ...’7
What becomes immediately apparent is that even 
this brief catalogue offers a keyhole glimpse of Indian 
life in the sixth century BCE. It can be infinitely 
extended. Such ‘sense-pleasures’, after all, were more 
than chance emanations. Gossip and garlands, pigs 
and poultry, couches and concubines imply a highly 
developed form of social and political organization, 
whose common denominator was the village; whose 
commercial nexus consisted of small market-towns 
and cities; at whose administrative apex stood a royal 
(or republican) capital with its frontier outposts.
What kind of village, though? Can its topography 
be charted? Its inhabitants traced and pinpointed? Is a 
tentative aerial survey, or reconnaissance, still possible? 
First slide, please.
Villages were grouped around the communal ricefield, with cattle wandering off into the scrubby edge

205
HAROLD BEAVER
of the surrounding jungle – the Māha Vana – which 
still stretched almost unbroken across the whole plain 
from the foot of the Himalayas (the Nepali Terai) to the 
Ganges.8 Felled and cleared in times of peace, it rapidly 
reswallowed towns and villages devastated in times of 
war.9 At all times it was a haunt of robbers and runaway 
slaves,10 even for a special force of uniformed police 
(among Kolyans and Mallas) notorious for extortion 
and brutality.11
The villages in their occasional clearings – on 
scattered, interconnected patches of land – seem to 
have been autonomous for their local affairs, each with 
their own council and elected (or possibly hereditary) 
headman.12 He was responsible for supervising 
the irrigation canals and public fencing round the 
collective field; for transacting payment of the land 
tax, or government tithes, with state officials; for 
organizing access by road as well as catering to any 
royal, or ministerial, progress.
Houses were grouped in narrow lanes, much as 
today, near a sacred grove; a stand of trees spared the 
clearing of the primeval forest. That was the home of 
nāgas, dryads or tree-spirits. There were no temples 
or shrines; and in all probability, no images either: 
no Shīva-lingam, no Brahmā, no Vishṇu. The later 
Brahmanic cults had not yet arisen: Sakka, Lord of the 
Thunderbolt, not Indra, ruled supreme; Brahmā was 
still an aspiring co-partner with Sakka; Shīva, known 
only in his youthful form of Isāna; and Vishṇu, or

206
THE BROKEN GONG
Veṇhu, a mere newcomer. * What stirred in the wind 
and rustled with the leaves was a whole folk mythology 
of devas (human spirits), yakkhas (ogres), nāgas (cobras 
or guardian serpents), garudas (harpies or griffins), 
gandhabbas (heavenly musicians) and asūras (titans). 
These animated the grove, the jungle and the land.
Each householder exercised three rights: the right 
of cultivation, the right of pasture and the right to 
forage in the forest. In contrast to the grassland and 
woodland, which were held in common, the Great Field 
(usually cultivated with rice) was divided into family 
plots by the intersection of irrigation canals so that it 
looked, in a striking simile, like a bhikkhu’s ‘patched 
robe’.13 After the crop was reaped, cattle roamed over 
the field; before the harvest, a single herdsman drove 
all the village cattle collectively beyond the field to a 
common grazing-ground. 14 The surrounding jungle 
was legally Terra Nullius and so Res Publica, ** where 
everyone could resort for brushwood, for timber, for 
herbs or hunting.
* Some scholars hold Sakka (= ‘capable’) and Indra (= ‘ruling’) to be 
alternate names of the same deity. Their names bear similar meanings 
and they both wield a thunderbolt; ‘Sakka’ is more commonly referred 
to, but ‘Indra’ does get a mention, e.g. at D 20:4.12. Brahmā is not 
portrayed as a co-partner in the suttas; the name refers to any one of 
an ascending scale of divinities, all of whom dwell in heavens higher 
and more refined than that of Sakka. Veṇhu appears briefly at D 
20:4.14. The Trimurti of Brahmā, Vishṇu and Shīva arose, as Harold 
suggests, after the time of the Buddha. (Ed.)
** ‘no-man’s land’ and ‘public property’ respectively. (Ed.)

207
HAROLD BEAVER
This is how the great bulk of the Buddha’s 
contemporaries lived and for millennia continued to 
live. Magadha (roughly what is Bihar today) reputedly 
had 80,000 villages. 15 It was a wholly communal, 
interdependent life. At the instigation of their headman 
and local council, villagers were conspicuously alert, 
engaged in the construction and maintenance of their 
council-halls, their rest-houses, their reservoirs and 
irrigation systems, as well as of road links between 
their own and neighbouring villages.
*  *  *
So much for the composite scene. But it was at closeups – at zooming in on and tracking details – that the 
Buddha excelled. Here follows a montage, initially 
drawn from the Dhammapada, vastly extended by the 
suttas, and with occasional support from the Jātaka 
cycle.
THE JUNGLE: 16 The tangle of Birana- and Māluvacreepers, choking and toppling the tallest trees, must 
have deterred all but the most resolute intruders. From 
its shadows, leopards and cheetahs regularly marauded 
nearby homesteads. In its thickets, jackals and hyenas 
prowled. Their howling and cackling, punctuated by 
the hoot of owls, throbbed through the night air. By 
day, though, even children might follow the flash of a 
parrot or mynah-bird down overgrown tracks where 
monkeys bounded, gibbering overhead, and peacocks 
scuttled through the shrub.

208
THE BROKEN GONG
For the traffic was two-way. Woodcutters penetrated 
in search of logs; thieves and runaway slaves, in search 
of refuge; mahouts, to check their elephant-traps; 
hermits, to establish their retreats. 17 Such hidden 
abodes inspired awe; they were held to be magically 
endowed. As the Buddha, on achieving Buddhahood, 
recalled: ‘Every roaming deer would startle me, even 
a peacock snapping a twig or the wind rustling in the 
leaves.’18
Near royal capitals a chase, or Deer Park, was often 
established (as at Isipatana, near Benares). In such 
reserves, cleared of undergrowth, even chariots could 
be used in the pursuit of boars or wild goats; but venison 
was especially prized.19 In princely apartments, tanned 
antelope skins were displayed as sporting trophies. 
(Restricted hunting on this scale, however, attracted 
poachers; Angulimāla, for one, boasted about how he 
could outrace, and dispatch on foot, a galloping stag.20)
With so much traffic at the forest’s edge, sometimes 
shrubs would spontaneously ignite, scattering sparks 
and ashes, followed by a roar of flames. To the villagers’ 
horror-struck eyes, these fires took on demon shapes 
gleefully ‘whirling their flickering arms as they leapt, 
tossing back dishevelled smoke-hair’.21
WATER: But mountain-torrents, or rivers, or lakes 
were usually close at hand. Reeds grew along the 
streams where reed-cutters plied their trade and matweavers built their huts (both reckoned among the 
lowest of the low). 22 On the lake’s edge, a fisherman 
might glance down at a freshly caught fish still flapping

209
HAROLD BEAVER
on the shore; or a youth, like the young Devadatta, aim 
his bow up at a flock of wild geese.23 In the lake perched 
long-legged herons – a bedraggled crowd – while swans 
rose skyward, ‘following the path of the sun’.24
The Ganges and Jumna rivers, with their many 
tributaries, were alive with traffic: here a sailboat being 
bailed out on a sandbank or a raft being laboriously 
punted upstream;25 there a herdsman fording his cattle 
in the dry season under a darting swarm of mosquitoes 
and flies. 26 But waterways, too, furnished sites for 
prestigious projects of engineering: for dams and 
reservoirs, embankments and dykes.
Up in hill country, monsoons could devastate a 
sleeping village, and channels, or run-offs, to control 
their flow had constantly to be repaired; just as 
embankments had to be built on the Ganges plain 
against a permanent threat of flooding. 27 Dykes, too, 
were built around the great reservoirs, or ‘tanks’, 
such as can still be seen in Sri Lanka at Polonnaruwa: 
‘a square pond on a level piece of ground, surrounded 
by an embankment and brimming with water, so that 
crows can drink out of it ...’ As the Buddha advised 
Ānanda: ‘Just as a man may build a dyke round a great 
reservoir to prevent the water from overflowing, even 
so were the eight basic rules for bhikkhunis laid down 
by me ...’ 28 But most elaborate of all were the massive 
dams for crop irrigation, such as that on the River 
Rohinī between Kapilavatthu and Koliya, the object of a 
heated dispute between the Sakyans and the Koliyans.29

210
THE BROKEN GONG
OPEN COUNTRYSIDE was regarded as a buffer-zone, 
or no-man’s land, between village and forest. Imagine 
some outcrop as landmark, surrounded by clumps of 
kusa-grass. On its far side, near the rainforest’s edge, 
bananas and plantains might be cultivated; nearer to 
the village, bamboo and mango (amba) groves would 
certainly be tended. Maybe a path wound up through 
the razor-sharp grass-blades to a cave where a tanglehaired saddhu, with a deerskin slung over his shoulders, 
squatted in the ashes.
From the cave-mouth, he could watch young 
swineherds and goatherds and shepherds with their 
flocks dotted about the landscape, plus an odd mule 
or two grazing among scattered palms (mostly old, 
lopped-off stumps). Or a hunted hare might catch his 
eye, running for cover under a wild fig whose top was 
black with crows just returned from marauding the 
Great Field; or an elephant desperately dragging his 
bulk from the edge of a swamp; or a peasant stooping 
to slice his sickle through grass (for thatch), which he 
bundled in tufted bales to a pole for the journey home.30
Far off, a funeral might be taking place: a whole 
family in white surrounding the pyre, offering perfumes 
and flowers before torching the wood. At which a thin 
plume of smoke would rise softly into the upper air.31
Vultures hovered above. Below hummed bees 
between patches of bramble, drawn by the sweet scent 
of rosebay and jasmine and sandalwood. A snake, 
slithering to the anthill where it lived, startled a spider 
which at once scuttled back to its web. Observed only

211
HAROLD BEAVER
by a fowler in his hide, camouflaged from all sides by 
branches and leaves. Even the saddhu could not have 
spotted that. A fowler, in any case, was also among the 
lowest of the low. His reward might consist of half a 
dozen song-birds caught in his net.
At dusk, single figures would emerge from the 
village to squat at the pits. On moonless nights, those 
who left it too late might splash into the village sewers, 
or even tumble into the cess.32
THE GREAT FIELD, as already seen, resembled a 
huge patchwork quilt. Though planted mostly with 
rice, there would also be bright clumps of sugarcane, 
or mustard, or cotton, or hemp, or flax (shimmering 
blue).33 Buffaloes worked in the paddies where women 
bent double to transplant the seedlings. Here and 
there, a father and son at the plough stumbled after 
yoked oxen: ‘their backs bent, their hair dishevelled, 
their faces dripping with sweat, their whole bodies 
fouled with dirt’.34 At mid-day they would return home 
– the father hoisting the plough on his shoulder and 
brandishing his ox-goad – their bare feet spattered 
with mud.35
THE ROAD: Rough tracks connected the villages. Only 
a single trunk-road was level enough for official tours 
by the king or his minister of state. The set formula 
for all such visits in coaches by kings, or Brahmans, 
or courtesans, ran: they ‘drove as far as the road was 
passable for carriages, then dismounted and proceeded 
on foot ...’ 36 (On arrival, they would commandeer all 
suitable village housing.37)

212
THE BROKEN GONG
Through lion-infested country a coachman would 
press his carriage on at full tilt. Merchants, weighed 
down with bullion, were escorted by a small armed 
guard. Some queer-looking travellers lingered by 
the roadside. Bandits, or dacoits like Angulimāla, 
abounded. They were often thought to be spies. For 
kings, so rumour spread, despatched secret agents 
into the backwoods. King Pasenadi of Kosala, for one, 
openly admitted to deploying agents in disguise:
‘ … Then men come back to report, still dressed as robbers 
after spying in the countryside. At first glance, I’m always 
taken in. Only after they’ve washed off their grime – once 
they’ve been thoroughly bathed and perfumed, had their 
beards trimmed and changed back into whites – can I 
recognize them at all. Then I know at once who they are.’38
Elsewhere the road was crowded with migrants: 
itinerant horse-traders; stray idiots; wandering lepers, 
like Suppabuddha; 39 entertainers, jugglers, bambooacrobats; the odd Brahman with a carrying-pole from 
which his possessions dangled; 40 ragged beggars, 
scarcely to be distinguished from ‘coil-haired ascetics’, 
like the Buddha’s ‘Group of Five’ or the thousand fireworshippers at Uruvelā. 41 Always in pairs, somewhat 
aloof, strode the Paribbājaka, or wanderers (women as 
well as men). A motley crew: some with their heads 
shaved; others with matted or elaborately braided 
hair and plaited beards; others again in saffron robes, 
stopping to expound their tenets and abuse or censure

213
HAROLD BEAVER
their opponents.42 (Most of these would put up at the 
village rest-houses.)
Equally hard to tell from mere simpletons, or 
imbeciles, was a whole range of fanatical holy men, or 
sadhus, including ‘naked ascetics’, like the Jains, and 
those variously clothed in hempen rags; or in the bark of 
trees; or in antelope hides; or in fabric spun from woodshavings; or human ‘head-hair’; or, more fantastically 
still, in cloaks of owl-feathers or ‘owls’ wings’. 43 Most 
bizarre of all, however, were those who had renounced 
all ritual, along with their family and caste. (‘Cynics’, 
Greeks would have called them.) Some imitated dogs, 
licking their food off the floor and curling up to sleep; 
others blundered about as if they were bullocks jostling 
into all and sundry.44
At some point, of course, the road had to stop, 
petering out in jungle or ‘waterless wilderness’. 
Caravans often crossed deserts at night. After sunrise, 
in the gathering heat, they made camp, unharnassing 
the waggons and drawing them round in a circle, with 
the oxen tethered to the wheels at its centre.45
VILLAGE huts, or cottages, were thatched. 46 Here, 
too, conflagrations flared since the grass was easily 
caught by sparks from a stove, or careless lamp, or 
outside oven. 47 All inhabitants were peasant-farmers, 
with a scattering of small-scale artisans like potters 
and brewers. In the lanes, two-wheeled waggons 
drew up with their oxen in harness. Each ox-horn 
was cased in silver; or variously dyed, one vermilion 
perhaps, one blue. At the back there might be a barn

214
THE BROKEN GONG
(such as that which once sheltered the Buddha during 
a thunderstorm), 48 or cattle in staked-out pens, or 
a pigsty maybe, or a calf tied to the leg of a cow, or a 
spare cartwheel. 49 Out front stood fat-bellied waterjars, screened by hibiscus in perpetual blossom.50 That’s 
where the toddlers played, pigeons roosted, dogs 
barked and cats chased mice between the mazelike 
roots of a towering banyan. 
Interiors were cool and dark, lit only by the glow 
from a smouldering fire, whose soft fumes mingled 
with an aroma of curd and cardamon and honey. Or 
soup might be on the boil, with horn spoons laid ready 
for the returning ploughmen and herdsmen. First 
propping their ox-goads and herding-sticks outside, 
they’d bend low at the door, brushing past a clutter of 
pestles and mortars and cookpots and store-jars and 
winnowing-baskets and palm-leaf fans on either side. 
At night, a lamp might be lit for granny to find her 
darning-needle.
All food and clothing were in the women’s domain. 
Floor space was cramped by their spindles and looms 
from which the coarse hemp, the goat-wool and sheepwool and tree-bark fibres were spun and woven. Cloth 
was left raw and undyed, as were the tough horse-hair 
blankets. Meals mainly consisted of thick rice porridge, 
rice with lentil curry (dhal), milk-rice (especially prized 
for religious offerings), bean-soup, lentil-soup, peasoup, barley gruel, sesame, vetch or tares, curds, ghee, 
with an occasional treat of honeycomb, or molasses, or

215
HAROLD BEAVER
palm-sap jaggery.51 Unleavened bread was baked in the 
oven outside.
Pretty much all village life was social. Not only 
communal events, such as horse-traders setting up 
their ‘market rings’; 52 or the Royal Annual Ploughing 
Festival when ‘a thousand oxen hung with flowers and 
five hundred ploughmen in their best finery’ competed; 
or the fairground thrill of a troupe of jugglers and 
acrobats showing up. 53 All relationships were public: 
friends pausing to gossip at the well; men and women 
setting off (at separate times) to bathe in a river or 
pool or tank, 54 armed with loofahs and powdered 
soap; children shooting marbles in the dust, or 
turning somersaults, or playing hopscotch, or building 
sandcastles, or throwing mudpies; 55 or catching crabs 
in the village-pond to torture and tease (while gadflies, 
in their turn, teased and tortured the children’s eyes 
and protruding navels).56
Theirs was a mirror-world of play: churning up 
mud with miniature ploughs, or bowling palm-leaf 
wheels along the paths, or racing model chariots, or 
letting toy arrows twang from bows. 57 Girls chanted 
counting rhymes (with a ritual swapping of tiny 
baskets), while boys shrilled ear-splitting whistles 
through folded leaves. Adults were just as noisy, what 
with their ubiquitous hawking and spitting; foul smells 
rose from ditches and drains. 58 Stray idiots would be 
pelted with clods to shouts of ‘Crazy fool! Crazy fool’; 59 
lepers showered with dust and cursed: ‘Clear off! And 
don’t forget to take your kids!’ 60 Low-caste traders

216
THE BROKEN GONG
like mat-makers or fowlers – especially ‘menial black 
fellows’ (of aboriginal stock) – were openly jeered as 
‘the scrapings from Brahmā’s feet’. 61 That was normal. 
At the best of times, life in such a close community was 
testing. Ascetics might deny themselves ‘liquor, wine 
or fermented brew’ – mainly rice-wine and arak – but 
not ordinary folk. 62 Old age came early enough with 
swollen hands, blotched skin, bent backs, lame legs, 
scabs and eruptions.
It should go without saying that such peasantry was 
illiterate. But the evidence wavers. A village-treasurer’s 
daughter, in one context, could apparently read and 
write, while even a common labourer, on another 
occasion, could make out a ‘leaf’ of scripture.63
*  *  *
Though social gradations were more fluid than in 
later historical times, a man’s role depended mainly on 
his class or caste: literally vaṇṇa, ‘colour’, a term that 
favoured the lighter-skinned offspring of the victorious 
Aryan invaders over the darker Dravidians.64
The first rank was reserved for warriors, or 
nobles (in Pali, Khattiyas; Sanskrit, Kshatriyas). Still of 
secondary rank socially – though already aspiring to 
their eventual, sure supremacy – was the sacrificial 
priesthood of brāhmaṇas.65 In third place came the 
mass of peasantry (Pali, Vessas; Sanskrit, Vaīśiyas), from 
which the priests and nobles had raised themselves

217
HAROLD BEAVER
and steadily detached themselves. These three orders 
constituted an independent and privileged society.
Below them, and supporting them, existed 
three other strata of unprivileged labourers and 
the oppressed: 1. the suddas (Sanskrit, śūdras), who 
composed the largely non-Aryan-hired workforce; 2. 
those ‘of low birth’ (hīna-jātiyo) devoted to ‘low trades’ 
(hīna-sippāni), such as bird-catching, cart-building and 
basket-making – that is, hereditary, aboriginal crafts; 
since ‘low trades’, however, also included potters, 
weavers, leather-workers, mat-makers and barbers, 
for instance, it seems that all handicrafts and traders 
in merchandise might be theoretically suspect; 3. 
slaves, who were mostly household servants. 66 The 
least systematized aspect of this sixfold division, then, 
is that concerning the role of trade. For where in this 
scheme did merchants belong?
In all probability, they were not subsumed. They 
did not belong. Most manual skills and vocations and 
professions, however low, did not yet imply any loss of 
caste. Even princes and nobles on occasion, as necessity 
arose, engaged in trade. Judged in solely economic 
terms, class was indeterminate.
*  *  *
It was the city, with its long line of bazaars, which 
was to become the locus of this expanding role of 
manufacture and trade. Whole streets were devoted 
to silversmiths or florists or wheelwrights, centred on

218
THE BROKEN GONG
their various guilds. From such diversification of crafts 
and the increasing number of their artisans, a new caste 
was eventually to emerge.
The number of guilds in the warren of the bazaars 
was traditionally given as eighteen, though it is doubtful 
whether hunters or sailors or fishermen would have 
been officially so organized. 67 Such an eighteenfold roll 
call would seem most likely to have included:
1. Workers in wood: carpenters, cabinet-makers,
 cartwrights, wheelwrights, ship-builders, etc.;
2. Workers in metal: blacksmiths (forging plough
 shares, axes, hoes, saws, knives, needles) and
 goldsmiths and silversmiths;
3. Stonemasons, chiselling steps, stairs,
 balustrades, pilasters, bowls and caskets, etc.;
4. Leather-workers, stitching saddles and sandals
 as well as luxury items such as rugs of fur;
5. Weavers of cotton, muslin, linen and silk for both
 personal apparel and coverlets, blankets,
 carpets, etc.;
6. Potters;
7. Ivory-carvers;
8. Dyers;
9. Jewellers;
10. Fishermen (on the rivers only);
11. Butchers;
12. Hunters and Trappers (importing venison and
 game into the city as well as satisfying an insatiable
 demand for fur and ivory);

219
HAROLD BEAVER
13. Cooks and Confectioners;
14. Barbers and Shampooers (also dealing in
 perfumes and dressing the elaborate turbans worn
 by the wealthier classes);
15. Garland-makers and Flower-sellers;
16. Sailors (on the great rivers mainly, but also on
 extended voyages out of sight of land);
17. Rush-workers and Basket-makers;
18. Painters (including Plasterers probably) of frescoes, 
 such as those in the palaces of Magadha and Kosala.
As King Ajātasattu of Magadha was fond of remarking: 
‘There are men of various callings. And what are they? 
They are mahouts, cavalrymen, charioteers, archers, 
standardbearers, adjutants, commandos and seven 
other grades of military personnel, secretaries, cooks, 
barbers, bath attendants, confectioners, garlandmakers, dhobi-men, weavers, basket-makers, potters, 
clerks and accountants.’ 68 But his was the view from 
the palace which privileged certain crafts and trades 
‘by royal appointment’, along with the army elite.
 
*  *  *
Merchants sailed up and down the great rivers as 
well as along both sea-coasts to trade. Cross-countrylong caravans of two-wheeled bullock-carts lumbered 
at a snail’s pace down trunk roads and occasional village 
tracks, covering no more than fifteen or so miles a day.69

220
THE BROKEN GONG
There were no bridges. Small streams, approached 
by gullies, had to be forded; deeper rivers, crossed 
on improvised ferries. Additional duty was extracted 
on reaching each state line. Dacoits, or highwaymen, 
were so widespread that fresh guards and local scouts 
had constantly to be recruited. Only luxury goods 
could possibly have offset these accumulated risks and 
expenses: silks and muslins, brocades and embroidery, 
cutlery and armour, perfumes and drugs, fur-rugs and 
ivory, jewellery and gold.
Yet fortunes were made. Anāthapindika, the 
Buddha’s great benefactor, was not the only millionaire 
in centres such as Sāvatthī, Vārāṇasī, Rājagaha, Vesālī 
or Kosambi. Banking facilities per se had not yet been 
invented, but promissory notes and letters of credit 
were regularly exchanged and interest rates charged. 
Neither gold nor silver money was apparently coined. 
Bargains were struck in terms of a square copper coin 
(the kahāpaṇa), about 146 grains in weight, guaranteed 
by the merchants themselves (or possibly the guilds) 
with their own individual punch-marks.
On an east-west axis, the Ganges and its many 
tributaries formed the main trade highway. Further 
west, into present Rajasthan, or south in the Deccan, 
caravans crossed the desert in the cool of night, piloted 
by the stars. The Buddha himself most frequently used 
the busy north-to-southeast trade-route, travelling 
back and forth from Sāvatthī (capital of the kingdom 
of Kosala) to Kapilavattu (his Sakyan homeland), to 
Kusinārā (where he was to die), to Vesālī (capital of the

221
HAROLD BEAVER
Licchavi confederation), to Pāṭaliputta (today’s Patna, 
Aśoka’s future capital), to Nāḷandā (later famed for its 
great international Buddhist university), and so home 
to Rājagaha (capital of the kingdom of Magadha), or 
even on to Gayā (near the site of his Enlightenment).
*  *  *
The Buddha’s quick eye and ear on such journeys 
are everywhere apparent – in his use of folklore, local 
proverbs, commonplace sights and sounds. For this 
bustle of detail I return to another montage of images 
drawn mainly from the Dhammapada and the suttas. 
For the Buddha was as equally well acquainted with the 
cities as the countryside of northern India.
CITIES: In these ever-expanding commercial centres, 
artisans mingled publicly with merchants, merchants 
with Brahmans. The commonest type of house was of 
two or three storeys, with a balcony in front and a flat 
rooftop.70 On these rooftops owners were often to be 
seen, shaded by a pavilion of some kind, eating their 
meals, checking through their accounts, or receiving 
visitors and clients. Here, too, washing could be hung, 
while women gazed down into the street or boys flew 
kites in the evening breeze. Superior homes had highpitched roofs pierced by attic windows: ‘houses with 
gable-ends, plastered inside and out’, boasting draughtproof walls, ornate ceilings, and tall, close-fitting 
doors (secured by bars) and shutters. 71 The entrance 
to a wealthy banker’s or merchant’s house (such as

222
THE BROKEN GONG
Anāthapiṇḍika’s in Sāvatthī) led through a gatewaylodge, with a treasury and grain-stores on either side, 
into an inner courtyard.
Separate blocks of crowded lanes were reserved 
for distinct professional quarters: most conspicuously 
for potters, jewellers, garland-makers, spinninghalls, weavers’ workshops (with their shuttles and 
looms), dyers (with their colouring vats), 72 barbers 
flourishing their razors, fletchers squatting among 
broken bows and arrows, silversmiths purifying their 
alloys, blacksmiths hammering their red-hot plugs of 
iron, carpenters planing ridge-poles and rafters. 73 All 
workshops were open to the street. Here a shopkeeper 
could be observed cautiously ‘holding up a pair of 
scales’; there a merchant, proudly showing off his 
family to a new customer: ‘These are my sons, sir. This 
is my wealth.’ 74 Shrines were scattered through every 
quarter; but supremely honoured was the Inda-khīla, 
or ‘locking-post’, at the Main Gate: elaborately painted 
and bejewelled as testimony to the city’s divinely 
inspired foundation.75
A model city was once described as ‘resplendent, 
symmetrical, harmoniously subdivided; protected 
by external moats and ramparts, gates and towers; 
distinguished by extensive commons and squares 
and crossroads; supplied with clean, smooth-surfaced 
highways and well-proportioned workshops; adorned 
with groves and gardens and lakes and lotus-pools and 
wells; blessed with all manner of holy places …’76 where 
perfumed dandies, robed in white, might drive hither

223
HAROLD BEAVER
and thither in their chariots, flourishing staves to goad 
on their mares with braided tails. 77 But this utopian 
vision must be flooded with the stench of sewers and 
an all-pervasive din: the mingled racket of hawkers’ 
cries, of tradesmen haggling, of carters spurring on 
their yoked oxen, of shouting amid the wheeled traffic. 
The Buddha, in his precise way, reduced this cacophony 
to just ten sounds: the trumpeting of elephants, the 
neighing of horses, the rattle of carriages, the boom of 
kettle-drums, the rat-tat of sidedrums, the twanging of 
lutes, the clamour of singing, the crash of cymbals, the 
clang of gongs and, tenthly, the food-vendors’ piercing 
refrain of ‘Eat, drink and be merry!’78
The streets were crowded with low-caste traders 
in their cotton dhotis, now stepping lightly aside for 
Brahmans, robed in white muslin, 79 holding aloft 
vermilion staffs (while clutching gold tableware to 
their sides); now jostling peasants with baskets of 
fresh produce from the countryside; or some noisy 
homecoming party perhaps; 80 or a household slave 
escorting a wealthy merchant (‘Make way! Make way!’) 
through the throng.81 At street corners, gamblers might 
crouch round a board marked with thirty-six squares, 
tossing dice. Occasionally, one would furtively dislodge 
a losing throw; or simply pop the unlucky dice into 
his mouth, exclaiming, ‘A dice is missing!’ and make 
off.82 The Buddha, of course, had spotted such tricks, 
at one point even comparing the commitment needed 
for belief in an afterlife (before a secular audience) to a 
‘lucky’ or ‘unlucky’ throw.83

224
THE BROKEN GONG
After nightfall the hubbub would slowly die down. 
That’s when prostitutes made their appearance on 
balconies or at doorways. (Some were widely renowned, 
such as Sirimā, the ‘beautiful courtesan of Rājagaha’, 
or Ambapalī of Vesālī. 84) Despite patrols of watchmen, 
divided into relays of three four-hour shifts, burglars 
too abounded, tossing their block and tackle to an 
upper window-frame or breaching the walls. 85 Once 
noting the rubble from his chariot, a naïve king was 
moved to ask: ‘How comes it that the houses in this city 
are everywhere nothing but holes?’ For ‘in the entire 
city,’ the narrator comments, ‘there was not a single 
house left unplundered.’86
OUTSIDE THE CITY WALLS: Beyond the South 
Gate the corpses of common folk were laid out (as 
among Parsees and Tibetan Buddhists to this day) to 
be stripped by jackals and vultures. No wonder the 
gate was believed to be haunted. 87 At night, only the 
most austere ascetics, including occasional bhikkhus, 
resorted there. At times of drought and famine, ‘first 
the poor died and their bodies were thrown outside ...’88 
Their corpse-stench (also known as ‘the snake-breath 
pest’) might be followed by outbreaks of cholera or 
bubonic plague.
This, too, was the traditional site for executions. 
The condemned criminal, with head shaved and arms 
tightly roped behind his back, was conducted from 
street to street ‘to the loud beating of a single drum,’ 
and a lashing at every crossroad, until the procession 
had passed through the South Gate. 89 There he was

225
HAROLD BEAVER
beheaded, his head impaled, his body hacked into four 
quarters and thrown to the four corners of the earth, 
North, South, East and West.90
From here, too, stretched the ‘burning-ground’, 
or river ghats. 91 Cremation, however, was privileged, 
granted solely to men outstanding for their wealth, or 
high birth, or public honour, such as religious teachers. 
Their ashes would also be scattered at the South 
Gate and even a memorial mound, or cairn, or stūpa 
might be erected there. 92 Though more usually such 
burial mounds were constructed on private grounds; 
or in cases of exceptional honour, at a conspicuous 
crossroads. So the Buddha’s instructions to Ānanda, 
on the building of his memorial stūpa, were by no 
means an innovation. Even by the Buddha’s time, such 
monuments had reached a vast, impressive, domed size 
– landmarks, visible from afar, across the plains.
On the far side, opposite the North Gate, lay the 
common rest-house for travellers who arrived after 
nightfall. That is where King Pasenadi died, homeless 
as King Lear, deposed by his own son, having reached 
Rājagaha on horseback after the gates were locked.93
EVERY ROYAL CAPITAL enclosed a vast, walled 
compound, whose principal structures consisted of 
a palace, on a commanding terrace, with a fortified 
treasury, swarming with accountants, adjacent. 94 
(‘Have you calculators enough to count the sand in the 
Ganges?’ a bhikkhuni once asked King Pasenadi in all his 
glory. ‘Or to reckon the water in the mighty ocean?’ 95) 
But tax-collection was precarious; to increase domestic

226
THE BROKEN GONG
revenues, there might well be a Public Gambling Hall 
to attract those corner-boys and injudicious punters, 
much as state lotteries today. Connected with this core 
stood the Hall of Justice, or place of litigation, where the 
king himself or his ministers of justice daily presided.96 
Sinuous pools (some planted with blue, some with red, 
some with white lotuses) linked elaborate gardens such 
as the Buddha could well remember from his youth; 
and on terraces, throughout this area, were scattered 
pavilions such as Suddhodana too had built for his 
son and heir: one as a summer residence, another as a 
winter retreat and a third for the monsoons. 97 Nearby, 
stood shrines tended by ‘the house-priest of the King’.98 
The hum of Brahman chanting, mingling with the 
hubbub of raised voices from the Hall of Justice, would 
reach anyone passing along the raked paths under 
broad-leafed shade trees.
To one side of the palace lay the regimental barracks 
of the household guard (infantry as well as cavalry) with 
their armoury stocked with daggers and swords and 
axes and bows and arrows and spears. The Dhammapada 
talks of ‘a warrior dazzling in his armour’, just as Homer 
sings of the Achaeans on the war-march:99
‘from the magnificent bronze the gleam went dazzling all 
about through the upper air to the heaven.’100
Over acres extended stabling for horses and huge 
army elephants (inured to arrows) tethered to rings 
with leather thongs, and corresponding quarters 
for mahouts and grooms. 101 That’s where Kesi, the

227
HAROLD BEAVER
horse-trainer, would have lived 102 and Channa, Prince 
Siddhattha’s groom, who tended Kanthaka. 103 In this 
same complex, too, would be sheds for ‘the royal 
painted chariot’, state coaches, golden palanquins or 
litters.104 Out of sight, further off, were tucked away 
service-quarters, storehouses and granaries.105
Permanently on call, in a rear wing of the palace, 
lived members of the royal retinue and harem: troupes 
of mummers or mimes, minstrels with lutes and sitars, 
archers and wrestlers for athletic contests, puppeteers 
with loose-limbed jointed puppets, hunchbacks, 
dwarves, drummer-bands and dancing-girls in scarlet 
cloaks tapping ‘gold-edged tambourines’ while 
flashing pearl necklaces, toe-rings and anklets. 106 King 
Ajātasattu, when he paid his one and only call on the 
Buddha, posed this provocative question:
‘Now what can be the point of renunciation or joining a 
sect like yours? Ordinary folk, by mastering ordinary crafts, 
get something out of them. They can make themselves 
comfortable in this world and maintain their families 
in comfort too ... Can you, sir, indicate any such clear 
advantage in this world for the life of a recluse?’107
Exemplary crafts, in the King’s order of priority, 
have already been listed: those of mahouts, 
cavalrymen, charioteers, archers, nine grades of 
military personnel, secretaries, cooks, barbers, bathattendants, confectioners, garland-makers, dhobimen, weavers, basket-makers, potters, clerks and 
accountants. Which evokes contemporary staffing

228
THE BROKEN GONG
needs of a camp or the royal palace, but as the Buddha 
deviously implied, it was on the peasant and tax-payer 
that both court and army ultimately depended.
Such regal resources, however, could put on 
splendid shows: as when King Bimbisāra departed from 
Rājagaha in his state coach to the sound of trumpet 
fanfares backed by drums and tabours and cymbals. 108 
Palace ceremonies were enthusiastically greeted by 
packed crowds ‘cheering “Hurrah!” and “Bravo!”’ That 
very visit by King Ajātasattu had begun with a moonlit 
procession from his then-capital at Rājagaha to a 
suburban mango-grove: with the King’s concubines 
mounted on five hundred cow-elephants and the 
King himself riding on his state elephant flanked by a 
column of torch-bearers.
REPUBLICAN CONFEDERATIONS, though proudly 
independent, were under constant threat of coups d’état 
(from within) or invasion (from without). Monarchs, 
like Ajātasattu, were on the warpath. Their massed 
armies dominated the plains, encroaching on their 
neighbours, fomenting rivalries, destabilizing loyalties, 
seizing on the least opportunity to impose centralized 
control. Coalitions of independent chieftains (rajputs , 
or warrior-princes) had become inherently fragile by 
the Buddha’s lifetime and were already doomed.
The Buddha himself had been just such a warriorprince. His clan, the Sākya, were a Himalayan people 
who had moved south into the plains. His father 
Suddhodana was their rāja, or elected chief, at a 
time when the Sakyan republic was succumbing to

229
HAROLD BEAVER
onslaughts from the neighbouring kingdom of 
Kosala. Like his father, Prince Siddhattha was clearly 
an instinctive democrat who praised the Vajjian 
republican system, recommending comparable rules 
for his Sangha;109 he rejected Devadatta’s bid to succeed 
him110 in favour of a majority rule, saying, ‘What I have 
proclaimed as the Dhamma and the Vinaya , Ānanda, 
that shall be your Master when I am gone’. 111 Despite 
Chinese and Tibetan traditions, the Majjhima Nikāya 
explicitly states that the Buddhist Sangha was to have 
no official head.112 ‘Sangha’ means ‘assembly’; ‘bhikkhu’ 
means ‘sharesman’ (sharing, that is, common wealth or 
public resources). Only the Buddhist order perpetuated 
the old political sanghas in a new spiritual guise. 
Theirs was to be a spiritual republic within the new
totalitarian states.
Confederate parliaments were held in pillared 
‘council-halls’: roofed but open-walled pavilions 
(santhā-gāra) – what Thais would call salas today. The 
sessions of the Sakyan Sangha were held at its capital, 
Kapilavatthu; the 220-man Sangha of the Licchavi 
Federation at Vesālī (ringed by three huge concentric 
walls).113 It was to the Mallas of Kusinārā, in assembly at 
their council-hall, that Ānanda first broke the news of 
the Buddha’s imminent demise.114
THE PALACE: The suttas, though, oddly are more 
revealing of the Buddha’s royal patrons: the refinement 
of their entourage, their luxurious furnishings and 
apparel. From a lotus-filled moat, a broad flight of steps 
led up to a stone facade (inlaid with gems perhaps),

230
THE BROKEN GONG
opening into ‘halls decorated with long lines of geese 
and quail’. 115 Private quarters, however, were tucked 
away out of sight in ‘gabled upper rooms, plastered 
inside and out ... ornamented with strips of coloured 
cloth and swags of flowers’.116 
It was the sheer exuberance of this plasterwork 
that most roused astonishment. For all exposed wood 
or brickwork, inside as well as out, was covered with 
a fine chalk plaster (chunam ) brilliantly painted in 
fresco. The Vinaya gives elaborate instructions for the 
preparation of a smooth ground, 117 even naming the 
four most common patterns: ‘Wreath-work’, ‘Creeperwork’, ‘Five-ribbon-work’ and ‘Dragon’s-toothwork’.118 Wherever human figures predominated, the 
composition was called cittāgāra, or ‘picture-gallery’.119 
Both the kings of Magadha and Kosala possessed such 
frescoed apartments.
Plaster decor, in itself, was not exclusive to royalty. 
Wealthy merchants too, as we saw, lived in rooms 
‘plastered inside and out, draught-proof, with closefitting doors’. They, too, might own furniture to match: 
for example, a couch ‘spread with a long-fleeced black 
rug and a flower-embroidered quilt and a counterpane 
of white wool, topped by an antelope-skin’, with scarlet 
bolsters at either end. There the master of the house 
might sleep, inhaling air fragrant with camphor, 
or aloe, or sandalwood, or jasmine, under a canopy 
‘attended to pleasantly by his four wives’. 120 A utopian 
vision, no doubt. In fact, an oral set-piece repeatedly 
used to invoke the Good Life. Not the items themselves,

231
HAROLD BEAVER
but their lavish display, then, seems to distinguish 
the imperial style. Even devas in heaven, this glimpse 
suggests, cannot transcend the formula:
‘It is precisely as if in some high pavilion – plastered inside 
and out, sheltered from the wind, secured by bolts and 
shutters – stood a canopied couch, draped by white, 
fleecy rugs as well as blankets and sheets and a deerskin 
bedspread, with red pillows at either end for head
and feet.’121
Nothing approaching such luxury, needless to say, 
was permitted to bhikkhus. As an ex-prince, though, 
the Buddha had lolled in just such retreats fitted 
with ‘gilded and upholstered couches, complete with 
crimson cushions at either end’. 122 As Buddha even, 
he continued to be royally entertained, as when 
Prince Bodhi invited him to share a meal ‘in the upper 
apartments of the Kokanada Palace’. 123 So he knew 
at firsthand what he was talking about. No wonder 
observers egged him on to stockpile a king’s ransom 
with his wizardry of silk pillows and goats-hair blankets 
and fringed coverlets and quilts of cotton wool and 
embroidered counterpanes and brocaded cushions 
and long-fleeced foot-mats and dancers’ carpets (wide 
enough for sixteen dancing girls) and saddle-cloths for 
elephants and trappings for horses and woolly carriagerugs and canopied divans – a whole inventory of Indian 
furnishings which ‘doubtless the worthy Gotama can 
conjure out of thin air without toil or trouble’.124

232
THE BROKEN GONG
COURT NOBLES wore sumptuous clothes to match; 
and the higher their rank, the more frequent their 
changes of clothes. A king’s, or royal minister’s, chest 
was ‘filled with so many multicoloured robes that 
whatever was needed morning, noon or night, could 
readily be picked out’. 125 Dress codes confined courtattendants to gold and spotless white in the form of 
fringed tunics worn with golden slippers. The cloth 
might be woven of fine wool or fine linen, but mainly 
of bleached Benares cotton. 126 Dyed radiant shades 
of blue or yellow or red, it could also be worn with 
extravagantly decorated sandals.
Gems flashed from head to toe, especially in ears 
where jewelled plugs pulled and elongated the lobes (as 
can still be seen in traditional images of the Buddha). 
Whereas older men wore beards, clean-shaven younger 
men kept only their head-hair uncut. Tied into a long 
top-knot and gathered in a turban wound round and 
round the head, it was transfixed by a jewelled pin. To 
renounce his privileged life, Prince Siddhattha first 
unwound his turban then sliced off his top-knot with 
his sword.127 To mark his coup d’état, Prince Viḍūḍabha 
displayed his father’s turban and sword at Sāvatthī as 
proof of the king’s deposition.128
In addition to swords, men might also flourish canes, 
or ornamental cylinders filled with scented or medicinal herbs. Both white and stripy sunshades were in fashion (packed on journeys in special ‘umbrella cases’). 129 
To preserve their complexion, even sandalled householders, strolling in the park, might hold a parasol. 130

233
HAROLD BEAVER
To us, such peacock posturing would seem
immensely alien: these exquisites hung with jewellery 
and bangles and garlands; or warriors, rather, constantly 
resorting to cosmetics (of Benares sandalwood). Handmirrors abounded for the fastidious application of 
eye-liner and blackening of eye-lashes with kohl. Both 
sexes regularly perfumed themselves with lotions and 
powders and unguents to keep their ‘hair sleek with 
oil ... eyes painted with collyrium’. 131 Even monks used 
make-up. Prior to approaching the Buddha (his own 
half-brother), Nanda ‘put on freshly pressed robes’ 
and decorously ‘painted his eyes with collyrium’.132 For 
which the Buddha roundly rebuked him.
Such self-consciousness must have intensified in 
the dry season when courtiers, fluttering yak-tail 
fans, required further ventilation from slave-girls 
waving palmetto fans. Repeated bathing was de rigueur: 
stepping down flights of stone steps into open-air 
tanks; or into underground sweatbaths, followed by 
a plunge into the pool. 133 Massaging and showering 
became daily routines: first the cleansing with bamboo 
scrapers; next a triple shampoo with yellow loam; then 
annointment with scented oil; sponged down by a 
second wash with fine soap-powder; completed by the 
dressing of hair or beard.134
 Evidence, in the suttas, for women’s toilette is very 
scant, as are any references to haute cuisine. Doubtless, 
courtiers consumed more game and exotic fruits from 
their gold and silver bowls. But the Buddha, recalling 
his own spoilt youth, mentions only ‘rice from which

234
THE BROKEN GONG
the black grain had been sifted’ (served either with 
ghee or flavoured with honey) and assorted curries.131
THE DIVERSITY OF ENTERTAINMENTS (public 
and private) can, yet again, be gauged by what was 
specifically denied to bhikkhus: dancing, sing-songs, 
drum sessions, verse recitations, variety shows – in a 
word, stage performances of every kind.136 Even ‘handclapping’ was singled out, which suggests audience 
participation must have been lively. But more intimate 
pursuits were clearly just as popular, since monks were 
expressly debarred from board games (dicing or chess) 
as well as parlour games such as spillikins or ‘flipping 
cowries with finger and thumb’ (a version of pushpenny, perhaps). Aesthetic pastimes, of course, were 
strictly out of bounds. The mere perusal of large-scale 
fresco decorations was discouraged, let alone actively 
‘playing with brush and paints’.137
If gaming was suspect, so were all competitive 
sports: ‘playing with iron balls’ (a form of pétanque), 
for example. The more vicious the sport, however, 
the bigger the draw: bull-fights, cock-fights, elephantfights, stallion-fights, buffalo-fights, goat-fights, 
ram-fights, even quail-fights, were all taboo. As were 
boxing and wrestling and fighting with staves. As 
were official ceremonies when the state – to mark a 
royal visit or anniversary, perhaps – laid on military 
parades, or military reviews, or military tattoos, or 
mock-manoeuvres watched from the palace roof by the 
dandified court. From all such pomp and circumstance 
monks were explicitly excluded.

235
HAROLD BEAVER
THE EVIDENCE FOR LITERACY, as already hinted, 
is vexed. Presumably kings and princes could write. 
Certainly one king on record ‘scratched a memo of 
gifts on a palm-leaf’, which his queen, in her turn, 
could ‘read’.138 The Royal Treasurer, in the Hamlet-like 
story of Ghosaka, inscribed a death-warrant; though 
the whole point of the story is that the youth who 
delivered it was illiterate (unless he naïvely refrained 
from breaking the seal). 139 And merchants, too, must 
surely have been literate as well as numerate. But one 
thing is beyond doubt: all major transactions, whether 
legal or spiritual, were preserved by oral transmission.
Among Buddhists, even the Canon Law (Vinaya), 
including the 227 monastic regulations (the 
Pātimokkha), was thus preserved: that is, by listening, 
pondering, memorizing and constant repetition. 140 
Tables of contents, as we might call them, were drawn 
up; but such lists, or formulas, or recapitulations, were 
themselves memorized to assist a fluent sequence of 
recall. No text in the Buddhist tradition seems to have 
been recorded earlier than four hundred years or so 
after the Buddha’s death; and that was in distant Sri 
Lanka, at a time of devastating invasions, when it was 
feared that the oral repertoire might perish.
Such prodigies of memorization (to which I return 
in Chapter 12) might suggest that Hindu culture was 
still almost wholly preliterate; but that is far from 
true. Writing (lekha) was in common use, but only 
for brief communications, such as public and private 
announcements, or financial memoranda, such as

236
THE BROKEN GONG
promissory notes and letters of credit. So common, in 
fact, that there was even a guessing game for children, 
called Akkharikā, in which letters were traced in the air
or on a playfellow’s back; which suggests how 
widespread knowledge of the alphabet already 
was. Of course, such alphabet games were denied 
to bhikkhus as too frivolous a pastime; but the art 
of writing itself was praised in the Vinaya and nuns 
were even actively encouraged in its practice. 141 
The profession of scrivener or clerk, for a merchant 
or royal household, was considered an honourable 
source of livelihood. 142 To judge from the transport, 
and occasional interception, of private mail, the art 
of reading was not only common among the elite but 
widespread among all classes. Otherwise there would 
hardly have been a point in official noticeboards with 
their advertisements for criminals WANTED ‘written 
up in the king’s porch’.143 In however simple a fashion, 
men and women, as well as children it seems, could all 
spell out a short, uncomplicated text.144
It was chiefly inadequate technology that confined 
writing to such brief memoranda; for each letter had 
to be painstakingly scratched, with an iron stylus, on 
a palm-leaf or piece of birch bark. No ink was used; 
even then their surface gloss cracked and splintered all 
too easily. Not until well after the Buddha’s time was 
a preparation to stabilize palm-leaves, and even more 
brittle birch bark, discovered, as well as an ink to rub 
into the scratches. All in all, then, the Buddha’s age 
must be reckoned at least potentially literate, but in

237
HAROLD BEAVER
such a qualified, limited way that – practically speaking 
– it might still be best described as semi-literate.
For its instincts remained habitually and obstinately 
oral. What may seem to us an uneasy equilibrium
between awkward techniques, an ingrained conservatism and the intransigent antagonism of Brahmans 
(insisting on their sole authority over sacred rites), was 
to continue for centuries longer. Socrates, in Phaedrus, 
quotes a story in which the god of writing appears to 
an early Pharaoh displaying his new invention, the 
hieroglyphic script. The Pharaoh shrugs it off, telling 
the god to take it away, since it would ruin his subjects’ 
power of concentration, merely filling them with the 
delusion that they knew things when they did not. 
No author himself, the Athenian too called writing a 
drug, which ruined memory by offering a kind of crib 
or aide-mémoire. Rousseau concurred. So did Ferdinand 
de Saussure, denouncing it as a ‘travesty’: not a ‘guise’, 
as it were, but a ‘disguise’ (pas un vêtement, mais un 
travestissement). Recorded texts, Socrates argued, 
don’t answer back when talked to, but, parrot-like, ‘go 
on repeating the same thing over and over,’ always 
needing their ‘father’ when they’re in trouble. (It was 
this whole logocentric tradition which Jacques Derrida 
attempted to subvert in De la Grammatologie.)
It could be maintained that far from inert 
conservatism, then, it was their acutely self-conscious 
rhetorical and argumentative skills that led Hindus for 
so long to hold writing at bay. What they loved, above 
all, was chatter, dispute, interpretation, play.

238
THE BROKEN GONG
Their multitudinous chatter was vividly reduced to 
just twenty-seven items: the tabulation, by rehearsal, 
itself becoming an oral set-piece.146 To this day, it could 
serve to categorize stories in our own tabloids. Under 
ten heads:
1. ‘The powers that be’: an indiscriminate jumble of
 kings, thieves, state-officials and the militia;
2. Disasters: including physical or psychological
 calamities (such as panic in battle);
3. Daily life: with its recurrent problems of food,
 drink, clothing, bedding, corsages, perfumes, etc.;
4. Relatives: to the nth degree;
5. Womenfolk: or, vice versa, menfolk;
6. Vehicles: shop-talk on the latest carriages,
 coaches, chariots and palanquins;
7.  Local news: desultory gossip from village streets,
 market-towns, waterfronts and far provinces;
8. Heroes: actual and mythical;
9. Ghost-stories: of the dead or departed;
10. Speculation on the perennial mysteries: of the
 origin of the land and the origin of the seas; of
 being and non-being.
(Only health-matters, money-matters, husbandry, 
sports and entertainment, from our point of view, are 
curiously missing.) 
But it’s rare to catch live sound bites on such topics 
from the streets. Except for stray comments on the 
passing traffic. Take the Brahman Jānussoni’s allwhite chariot – drawn by four white mares, in white

239
HAROLD BEAVER
harnesses – with its white upholstery, in Sāvatthī.147 He 
himself was wearing white sandals, and was
‘even being fanned with a white fan. When people saw 
this, they cried: “How simply divine! What a simply divine 
chariot! Wow, that’s what I call a heavenly vehicle!”’
Or that rowdy bunch of youths driving carriages out 
of Vesālī:
‘Some were in blue, with blue make-up on, blue clothing 
and blue ornaments. Some were in yellow, with yellow 
make-up on, yellow clothing and yellow ornaments. Some 
were in red, with red make-up on, red clothing and red 
ornaments. Some were in white, with white make-up on, 
white clothing and white ornaments.’148
That, too, must have elicited indignant, or amazed, or 
amused Licchavi comment. Even the Buddha exclaimed 
at the sight, calling to his monks: ‘Just look at that 
stylish crew! Take a good look and you’ll get some 
notion of the Thirty-Three Gods!’149
Loquacity, rowdiness, noisiness went unrestrained. 
Occasionally, even the Buddha complained. But kings, 
it seems, exercised even less control. ‘I’m an annointed 
warrior,’ King Pasenadi grumbled:
‘I’ve sole authority to execute those deserving execution; 
to fine those deserving a fine; to exile those deserving 
exile. Yet, even when presiding at council, my councillors 
interrupt me. In spite of my pleading, “Gentlemen, stop 
this continual jabber! Just wait till I’ve finished speaking!” 
still they go on interrupting.’150

240
THE BROKEN GONG
Such frenzied unruliness, paradoxically, was 
tempered by play. Especially by the evolving rules 
of chess (played on 64- or 100-squared boards). Not 
just ordinary chess either, but fantastic tournaments 
of imaginary chess, using the sky as chessboard, or 
contests on moon-shaped chessboards. Mind games, 
too – variations of ‘Call my Bluff’ – were popular as 
well as those alphabetical quizzes (with disembodied 
signifiers) already mentioned. 151 For in this semiliterate age, reading was the universal obsession: 
studying, spelling, identifying, decoding, interpreting 
all kinds and varieties of signs. Divine mysteries 
became concealed signatories; this world, a dark text 
whose marks cried out for deciphering. Five days after 
the Buddha’s birth, 108 Brahmans were invited by 
King Suddhodana ‘to examine the signs’. Eight of these 
Brahmans were selected to expound ‘the science of 
reading’. They alone were to interpret Queen Māya’s 
dream (of the ‘white elephant carrying a white lotus in 
his trunk’) on the day of his conception.152
Yet on all this ‘the ascetic Gotama’ was to turn his 
back.153 The elaborate rigmarole of Brahman divination 
and Brahman prophecy and Brahman exorcism was 
denounced as a sham. In a word, the Buddha condemned 
that whole obsession with reading as unriddling, 
unriddling as calculation, calculation as prediction 
and prediction as personal salvation, which equated 
the interpretation of dreams (such as the Queen’s) 
with problems in accountancy, and treated ‘casting 
spells’ on an intellectual par with philosophizing
or verse composition.

241
HAROLD BEAVER
For the cultural range of this diagnosis was 
immense: reading the palms of the hands as well as 
the soles of the feet; reading the knuckles of young 
men and women (to settle an engagement); reading 
telltale marks on a torso or piece of land (set aside for 
building); reading both vast, evanescent designs – such 
as a lightning-flash, say – and the ineradicable, tiny 
indentations in cloth gnawed by mice; reading portents 
(for good or evil) in a soldier’s sword; reading heavenly 
signs (such as comets, or meteor-showers, or eclipses 
of the sun and moon); reading worldly signs (such as 
earthquakes, drought, famine or disease); interpreting 
animal-calls and birdsong (especially the cawing of 
crows); calculating an individual’s lifespan; predicting 
royal victories and defeats; distinguishing offerings 
suitable for temple oblations; reciting magical charms 
(with or without blood rites); casting malignant spells 
(to cause lockjaw or a miscarriage).
This cosmic, omnicompetent priestly lore finally 
converged with quasi-medical prescriptions: for curing 
impotence and preventing abortions; for treating rat 
bites or scorpion stings; for compounding herbal rinses and emetics, purgatives and expectorants; for preparing ear-drops, nose-snuff and eye-lotion (to remove 
cataracts); for lancing phlegm from the throat and bandaging sores. Such was the diagnostic wisdom of the 
Buddha’s time, the higher literacy from which he consistently disengaged: ‘the science of reading the signs’.
*  *  *

242
THE BROKEN GONG
The opening of this chapter evoked a vast sweep of 
landscape ranging from the Himalayas to the Ganges. 
But even scenery, etymologically, is something ‘read’ 
or staged; it is a wholly mental phenomenon, becoming 
‘landscape’ only when it responds, or corresponds, to 
human needs. When the Buddha dreamt that ‘this great 
earth was his bedstead; the Himalaya was his pillow; his 
left hand rested in the Eastern Ocean, his right hand 
in the Western Ocean, his two feet in the Southern 
Ocean’, he not only assimilated the ‘king of mountains’ 
to his destiny, he transfigured the whole of India by his 
presence.154 Just as later, imagining ‘a lotus-pond with 
cool, transparent water ... not far from a shadowed 
forest’, he transformed a perfectly attainable setting (in 
India and throughout Southeast Asia) into a visionary 
nibbāna, an image of ‘perfect happiness ... even in this 
present world’.155
Idyllic settings form a familiar feature of early 
Buddhism. Their enchantment, in many, induced a 
dreamy, poetic mood. As that of the Venerable Sāriputta 
greeting five elders after nightfall: ‘How delightful this 
Gosinga forest is by moonlight! With the Sāla trees in 
full blossom, it’s as if some heavenly perfume were 
adrift!’156 Or that of King Ajātasattu resting at night, 
with a retinue of ministers, on his palace rooftop: ‘How 
lovely this moonlit night, my friends! How remarkable 
to behold the white lilies blooming by the light of the 
full moon!’157 Or think of King Pasenadi, exercising in his 
park, observing root-hollows ‘so quiet, so undisturbed 
by voices, with an air of aloofness so withdrawn ... that

243
HAROLD BEAVER
they reminded him of the Buddha’. 158 Or the Buddha 
himself, shortly before death, fondly recalling his many 
hermitages and retreats:
‘Delightful, Ānanda, is Rājagaha. Delightful, Ānanda, is the 
Vultures’ Peak. The Banyan Park and the Robbers’ Cliff and 
the Sattapaṇṇi Cave on the flanks of Mount Vebhāra are 
all delightful. So, too, is the Black Rock on the slopes of 
Mount Isigili and the Snakes’ Pond in the Sappasoṇḍika 
Mountains and the Tapodā Grove Monastery and the Black 
Squirrels’ Feeding-Ground in Veḷuvana. Jīvaka’s mangogrove is delightful as is the Maddakucchi deer-park at 
Rājagaha. At each of these places I exclaimed: “Ānanda, 
how delightful this spot is!”’159
These idyllic landscapes are all Buddhist variants on 
the locus amoenus. As were similar mysteriously charged 
romantic landscapes. For even by the Buddha’s time, 
as already observed, there were ruined cities – former 
royal capitals with crumbling tanks and walls – buried 
deep in the jungle, on which wanderers along some 
ancient track might stumble; and such sites, too, could 
be called by the Buddha ‘a delightful place’. 160 But not 
all magic settings were similarly charmed and timeless. 
The level waters of the holy Ganges, for example:
‘At one time the Blessed One was staying near Kosambī, 
on the banks of the Ganges, when he spotted a large log of 
wood whirled along by the current.
“Bhikkhus, do you see that large log?” he asked.
 “Yes, sir,” they replied.
“Now if that log doesn’t run aground on the near bank, 
or on the far bank, or sink in midstream, or catch on a

244
THE BROKEN GONG
sandbank, or isn’t seized by humans (or non-humans, 
for that matter), or sucked into a whirlpool, nor rot 
from soaking, then it’s sure to float on eventually to
reach the ocean ...”’161
How precisely the Buddha’s eye plots the erratic 
course of a chance log drifting downstream! Now swept 
by the current close in to one bank, now in to the other. 
Now momentarily submerged in mid-river, or snagged 
on a sandbank, or sent spinning in a whirlpool; or 
listing, more and more sodden and waterlogged, until 
finally dragged under ... It was not the ship traffic, nor 
fishermen, nor bathers – that is, the life on the Ganges – 
that primarily drew the Buddha, but the unpredictable 
flux and reflux of unseen natural forces. When a 
point-by-point explication was requested, an obliging 
interpretation was promptly offered. (Laymen’s drift 
must be skilfully transformed to pilotage. Avoiding 
collisions, through self-control, is the bhikkhuhelmsman’s task.) But the sliding tumult of such holy 
landscapes was deliberately left unexpressed. Emerson, 
in his mild way, phrased it like this: ‘There are no 
fixtures in nature ... We live amid surfaces, and the true 
art of life is to skate well on them.’162
*  *  *
Only the afterlife offered a means of rising to surer 
ground. As well as a chance of escaping the stifling heat 
of the Ganges plain. For landscape there, it was assumed, 
would be climatically zoned: from the charcoal furnace

245
HAROLD BEAVER
(of hell) to the cesspit (of animal wombs) to the dappled 
shade (of the realm of ghosts) to the luxuriant green 
(of human abodes) to the upper pavilions (of the spirit 
world) to the luminous waters (of nibbāna).163 For what 
else was nibbāna but an unexpected plunge into a forest 
pool? A refreshment for scorched and weary limbs? A 
release from emotional and mental stress? A shattering 
of surface tension? A delicious descent into coolness?
‘And the pool was filled with water out of sunlight, 
And the lotos rose, quietly, quietly,
The surface glittered out of heart of light …’164

7
A young Brahman, accompanied by a friend, once 
presented himself to the Buddha, boasting:
‘I’m Pokkharasāti’s pupil 
And he was taught by Tārukkha; 
Word-perfect we, too, now are 
Skilled masters of the Triple Veda.’1
One thing still bothered him, though – a point of 
incessant wrangling between them: ‘Was a Brahman 
a Brahman solely by his pedigree (reaching back 
seven generations), or by his reputation for virtue 
and ritual acts?’ He versified this dilemma to show off 
his scholastic training which put a high premium on 
extempore poetic speech:
‘For, Gotama, between us twain 
Birth is a subject of dispute. 
How should one recognize divines? 
Is it by breeding or repute?’

247
HAROLD BEAVER
The Buddha, however, proved more than the student’s 
match, capping his six stanzas with an impromptu rap 
of an additional fifty-seven.
It was not only at metrical improvisation that 
the Buddha excelled. He delighted in the very stuff 
of language, deftly playing on its resonances, its 
unexpected tonal riffs, its imbricated sounds and 
meanings, its potential – in short – for both enhancing 
and undermining itself by haphazard shock waves of 
echolalia. Punning was the Buddha’s stock-in-trade 
far beyond what is generally acknowledged. Take this 
cluster of puns from the Dhammapada, centred on the 
word ‘vana’:
‘Of him who without vana 
Leans to vana, when free in vana 
Runs back to vana, men will say: 
“Look! Free to bondage he returns!”’2
Which sounds riddling only because ‘vana’ in Pali 
can simultaneously mean ‘forest’ as well as ‘passion’ or 
‘desire’. So the fourfold repetition of ‘vana’ represents 
an ambiguity – a crux – of which the following 
transliteration makes up but one of several possible 
interpretations: ‘Whoever commits himself to the 
forest, having ousted desire, running free in the forest 
only to pursue his desire, of him men will say: “Look! 
Free to bondage he returns!”’
The test continually wavers since it reflects a 
genuine double bind in hermits’ lives, for whom the

248
THE BROKEN GONG
forest was both an ideal retreat from worldly passion 
and a place to confront their most intimate longings. 
An English homonym, conflating ‘wood’ with ‘would’, 
feebly approximates this shimmering play, since only 
by yoking both signifiers together can their dual 
signifieds turn transparent:3
‘Cut down the “would” , but not the “wood” , 
Since from that tangle fear is born. 
If you chop through the undergrowth, 
you shall be freed from all desire.’4
‘As long as “would” is uncontrolled 
So long is man in bondage bound 
To womankind – do what he would – 
Like milk-calf tethered to a cow.’
‘As trees, though felled, can sprout again 
From roots undamaged by the axe, 
So dukkha shoots and shoots again 
Where craving is not rooted out.’5*
Elsewhere the pun on ‘forest’ is so casually, so 
surreptitiously, introduced that hardly a breath of its 
inner tension stirs the woodland calm:
‘Whether in town or forest deep, 
Whether in valleys or on hills, 
Wherever Arahants abide, 
There are utopias of delight.
Even forests prove delightful 
In which others cannot delight; 
* Most translations skip the pun and use ‘forest (of lust)’ or its 
equivalent. (Ed.)

249
HAROLD BEAVER
Stripped of the burdens of desire, 
They find joys others cannot find.’6
‘Taming himself in solitude – 
Sitting alone, lying alone, 
Walking alone unweariedly –
He finds delight in the forest.’7
‘Vana’, then, functions at a magic crossroads where 
either element may be present, or both prevail, blending 
into neither ‘forest’ exactly, nor ‘desire’ exactly, but 
into an indiscriminate ‘forest of desire’. Similarly, an 
elephant, by the predicative ‘danta’, is transformed into 
something at once immensely powerful and immensely 
self-controlled:
‘The tusked are tame among the crowds; 
The king bestrides a tusker tamed. 
Best among men are the self-tamed 
Who tranquilly endure abuse.’8
For ‘danta’ may mean both ‘tamed’ (as past participle) 
and ‘tusked’ (as in ‘dental’), much as an elephant’s 
footprint may temporarily blur the divergent concepts 
of ‘features’ and ‘feet’:
‘Monks, just as all features of the feet (padāni) of junglecreatures (jangalānaṃ) are combined in the elephant’s 
foot, which is the chief in size, so of all the features (padāni) 
conducive to the attainment of enlightenment, the faculty 
of wisdom (paññindriya) is considered chief.’9
– as if an object so vast must be vastly inclusive in 
quality as well as quantity.

250
THE BROKEN GONG
Such emblems assert devious claims for both wisdom 
and self-control. ‘Dīpa’ is another, denoting ‘island’ as 
well as ‘lamp’.10 A well-lit refuge, then:
‘By energetic mindfulness 
And self-controlled attentiveness 
The wise man makes an insular 
Retreat no flood can overflow.’11
‘Make an island of yourself!’ ran a familiar refrain:12
‘Therefore, Ānanda, you should live as islands unto 
yourselves, being your own refuge, with no one else as your 
refuge; with the Dhamma as a lamp, with the Dhamma as 
your refuge, with no other refuge ...’13
These ‘islands’, like those ‘forests’ and ‘elephants’, are 
situated at a random junction on unexpected vocal 
fault lines. 
Such verbal effects almost defy translation, as in 
this pair of parallel tenets:
‘All those who are not free of stains, 
Who proudly don the stainless robe 
Without restraint or truthfulness, 
Betray the cloth of dyed yellow. 
But he who vomits forth his taints, 
By moral precepts firmly led, 
Endowed with truth and self-restraint, 
Is worthy of the dyed yellow.’14
The chime here turns on āsāva and kāsāva: āsāva which 
is literally an ‘eruption’, and so ‘moral stain’; kāsāva, a 
yellow stain or dye. 15 A word-for word transliteration 
might run:

251
HAROLD BEAVER
anikkasāvo (one not free of stains) kāsāvaṃ (stained 
yellow)
yo (who) vatthaṃ (cloth or robe) paridahessati (will put 
on)
apeto (deprived of) damasaccena (having restraint-andtruth) 
na (not) so (he/that one) kāsāvaṃ arahati (worthy-of-thedyed-yellow).
In a nutshell, yellow is a stain for the stainless. Those 
not yet free of stains (anikkāsavo) are unworthy of the 
yellow stain (na kāsāvam arahati ): that is, donning the 
yellow robe (kāsāvaṃ vatthaṃ).
yo (who) ca (and) vantaka (vomits) asāv’assa (his taints) 
sīlesu (in precepts) susamāhito (well-established)/
upeto (endowed with) damasaccena (having restraintand-truth) 
save (he/that one indeed) kāsāvam arahati (worthy-ofthe dyed-yellow).
Which turns the Sangha’s saffron itself into a Buddhist 
paradox: a kind of stainless stain, a non-colour dazzling 
in its ideal radiance.
Or take the equally resourceful pun on mona (silence) 
and muni (a sage):
‘Neither by mona a muni,
Nor by “silence” a “sage” – rather 
A man with scales who picks only
The best, rejecting all that’s bad.’16

252
THE BROKEN GONG
For one who is silent is a sage; or, rather, a muni is 
someone practising mona (like bhikkhus on their 
alms-round). Not that the Buddha himself practised 
silence or allowed his monks altogether to abstain 
from speaking. The implication is more subtly teasing: 
the silence advocated here being an inward silence, 
without proliferation of thought:
‘When, muffled as a broken gong,
you don’t reverberate,
you’ve reached Nibbāna:
recrimination’s turmoil finally stilled in you.’17
That is why the Buddha is known (especially among the 
Japanese) as Sakyamuni, or ‘Sage of the Sakyans’.
*  *  *
But he could do more than tease. He could be 
deliberately perverse, distorting the root meaning of 
common terms for a charade of pseudo-definitions:
‘Obstructing evil’ (brāhmaṇo); 
‘living serenely’ (samaṇo); 
‘banishing blemishes’ (pabbajito: for one ‘gone forth’ 
homeless).18
It’s a poker-faced performance, oddly reminiscent 
of Humpty Dumpty in its cool bravado:
‘When I use a word,’ Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a 
scornful tone, ‘it means just what I choose it to mean – 
neither more nor less.’
‘The question is,’ said Alice, ‘whether you can make words

253
HAROLD BEAVER
mean so many different things.’
‘The question is,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘which is to be 
master – that’s all.’19
In the same reckless spirit, the Buddha challenged 
Vedic tradition with his homespun etymologies, in 
which brāhmaṇo no longer defined the caste privileged 
by Brāhma; brāhmacariyā no longer derived from the 
‘holy life’; and brāhmamukhayā no longer denoted 
‘born from the mouth of Brahma’. No, ‘brahman’, the 
Buddha proposed, was really derived from bāhitapāpo 
(bāhitapāpadhammo, in full), ‘one who has blocked out, or 
barricaded, evil dhammas’. Samaṇa no longer described 
simply the religious life of a recluse (samacariyā), but the 
Buddhist counterpart of a Vedic Brahman. ‘And how is 
a bhikkhu a samaṇa?’ demanded the Buddha.20 Because 
‘he has quieted [samita ] unprofitable dhammas’, 
reducing thought and feeling to an even level which 
is always the ‘same’ (its common root). Pabbajito no 
longer denoted ‘one “gone forth” into the homeless 
life’, but – as if contracted from pabbājahamattano – ‘one 
who banishes blemishes’.
The Buddha made these absurd linguistic forays on 
the principle that spoken language is harmonious, with 
rudimentary etymons at its core, so that all meanings 
can be deduced from its inherent chords – even tabulated theoretically in a concordance. He delighted in such 
echo-soundings and alliterations, condensing a whole 
lifetime’s experience, for instance, into twelve syllables:

254
THE BROKEN GONG
‘jāyati ca 
jīyati ca 
mīyati ca’21
(‘There is birth; there is decay; there is dying’), as 
he enjoyed undermining Brahman authority, going 
upstream (uddhaṃ-soto ) against the official current 
of their terminology, reinventing language to suit his 
own professional needs.22
Which also explains why the Buddha (Humpty 
Dumpty-style) was so fond of riddles:
RIDDLE: ‘And why, bhikkhus, do you say rūpa [body]?’
SOLUTION: ‘It is ruppati [afflicted], bhikkhus, that’s why it’s 
called a rūpa. Afflicted by what? Afflicted by cold and heat, 
hunger and thirst, wind and dazzle, gnats, mosquitoes 
and snakes. Because it “bodes” ill, bhikkhus, that’s why it’s 
called a “body” . Being ruppati, it is called a rūpa.’23
Or again, on another occasion:
THE VENERABLE RĀDHA: ‘A satto [being], a satto, we are 
called. Just why, sir, are we called a satto?
THE BUDDHA: ‘Because of being satto [caught] and visatto 
[held fast] by desire, by attachment, by delight, by craving 
for rūpa ... for feeling ... for perception ... for mental activities 
... for consciousness ... that’s why one is called a satto.’24
Thus ‘being’, by a pun, is identified with entrapment 
and ‘body’, with poetic justice, defined by its afflictions, 
as if the slippery homophones of Pali invariably map 
out the truth.
*  *  *

255
HAROLD BEAVER
The Buddha loved punning for much the same 
reasons as Shakespeare loved punning: to shake up his 
audiences, to make them wince or smile, to conjure 
up lofty or vulgar associations. Commenting on Joyce, 
Richard Ellmann put it like this:
‘In a pun the component parts remain distinguishable, 
and yet there is a constant small excitement in their being 
yoked together so deftly and so improperly. An equivalence 
is at once asserted and questioned, sounds and senses in 
mutual trespass are both compared and contrasted.’25
No wonder the Buddha, like Joyce, remained an 
inveterate punster. For puns can shock. They can 
disturb complacency. ‘Still, they’re only jokes,’ it may 
be objected, ‘so long as those double-meanings don’t 
fuse.’ But that would be a gross misunderstanding. 
The whole point of a pun, the Buddha comprehended, 
was precisely that: their incomplete juncture. To have 
had them fuse would have been to abolish their very 
raison d’être, the sheer fun of their being unexpectedly 
brought together in the first place. For only on the 
condition that both parts of a pun preserved their 
separate identities could those identities be shown 
to be less insulated, or isolated, than had previously
been thought.
In this, of course, they resemble the Buddha’s other 
all-purpose, all-time favourite. What else is allegory 
but an experiment in narrative conjunction without 
figurative fusion, and a momentary play with juncture 
as long as the twin narratives are kept distinct? Even

256
THE BROKEN GONG
within triple, or quadruple, or quintuple junctures, 
all allegories and puns share this same protean role. 
Though the Buddha’s allegories, on the whole, prove 
less light-hearted than his puns. Take his wordplay on 
‘loka’ (latin ‘locus’), meaning ‘world’, and ‘paloka’ (from 
the verb ‘dissolve’). When Ānanda, acting the stooge as 
usual, wondered aloud: ‘“Loka!” they all keep repeating: 
“Loka!” Why, Lord, is it called “loka”?’ The Buddha – 
without batting an eyelid – observed: ‘Whatever is 
paloka, Ānanda, is naturally called “loka”.’ Which is 
as much as to say: ‘Whatever is whirled by nature is 
naturally called “world”.’26
Just a sally, no doubt, a playful pounce. But if that 
throwaway line was conceived on a whim, its point 
was then rigorously hammered home by multiplying 
all aspects of human percipience (with its sixfold 
sense-organs, six sets of sense-data, six categories 
of consciousness, six means of sense-contact) to a 
maximum of twenty-four variations: ‘And what is it 
that can be whirled? Our eyes are in a whirl; visible 
objects are in a whirl; visual consciousness is in a whirl; 
visual contact is in a whirl. So are our ears and sounds 
... our taste buds and tastes ... our nostrils and smells 
... our mind and mind-consciousness – all these are 
characteristically and intrinsically and perpetually in 
a whirl.’
*  *  *

257
HAROLD BEAVER
A passing quip is thus revealed as much more than a 
mere quip. The Buddha was ever alert to the possibility 
of processing, or elaborating, words fortuitously 
launched in play. Despite his grim acknowledgment 
of pain, his was an essentially comic vision. Or rather 
because of that grim acknowledgement, his was a 
startlingly comic vision. For what he taught was the 
cessation of pain by detachment from the illusions of 
pain; and his whole teaching was offered as a guide, 
or blueprint, to that escape. Whether chatting with 
his young son or a dacoit, whether under threat or 
relaxed, the Buddha could always banter in the same 
light-hearted way.
One form it took was teasing equivocation. As in 
that dream-like sequence when the bandit Angulimāla, 
spotting a monk on the road, decided to pursue him 
hotfoot with a sword. 27 But the Buddha, with a rare 
surge of magic power, continued to outstrip him: that is, 
the faster Angulimāla sprinted, the further he dropped 
behind – let alone close the gap between them – though 
the monk was apparently walking at his normal pace. 
At last, in amazement, Angulimāla bounded to a halt. 
‘Stop, monk! Stop, monk!’ he shouted. To which the 
Buddha, still sedately forging ahead, replied: ‘I have 
stopped, Angulimāla. Now you stop, too!’ Dumbstruck, 
the bandit sought to unravel this puzzle. Perhaps it 
suggested some kind of cautionary rhyme. For, like the 
young Brahman, he too turned to impromptu verse:28

258
THE BROKEN GONG
ANGULIMĀLA: 
‘While walking, monk, you tell me you have stopped; 
But when I’ve stopped, you tell me I’ve not stopped. 
What can the meaning of this riddle be? 
How is it you have stopped and I have not.’
THE BUDDHA: 
‘Angulimāla, I have stopped for good 
From desecrating any living thing; 
But you show no respect for things that breathe, 
That’s why I say I’ve stopped and you have not.’
So the cipher was deciphered; the riddle solved; 
the situation resolved. Repentant (we are told), the 
highwayman flung aside his sword and threw himself 
at the Buddha’s feet, henceforth to become a devoted 
and exemplary disciple.
The surrealism of the whole scene eerily corresponds to the Buddha’s quibbling riposte as he dallied 
and toyed with that criminal thug. But his humour 
was equally teasing when conversing in private with
his son:
‘What’s a mirror for, do you think, Rāhula?’ he once asked 
him.
‘For the sake of its reflection, sir,’ the seven-year-old 
replied.
‘So remember, Rāhula, only after continual reflection 
should an act be performed; only after continual reflection 
should an assertion be made; only after continual 
reflection should a decision be reached.’29
This light-hearted, humorous quality was something 
the Buddha shared with his contemporaries. If he

259
HAROLD BEAVER
transcended his age, he was also clearly a man of his 
age – akin even to those madcap Licchavi youths, 
in their make-up and finery, whom he had jokingly 
compared to the Thirty-Three Gods. 30 Just as they 
had (contemptuously) snapped their fingers at the 
courtesan Ambapālī, he had (metaphorically) snapped 
his fingers at the highwayman Angulimāla. Just as 
they had cheekily called her the ‘mango-woman’, he 
too loved every kind of cheeky and unexpected pun. 
Sometimes he was even caught with a smile flitting 
across his face for no apparent reason. ‘What, pray, is 
the reason for the Exalted One’s smiling?’ Ānanda twice 
asked him. ‘Tathāgatas surely never smile without 
cause.’31 Only to be fobbed off with a long shaggy-dog 
folk-tale of a reply.
*  *  *
Too much in the later tradition (of legend and 
iconography) seems altogether too solemn and remote. 
For an Enlightened One, after all, the world must 
appear a comically tawdry, incongruous affair. The 
tenth and last of the so-called ‘ox-herding’ pictures (of 
Ch’an Buddhism) presents a gleeful, high-spirited old 
hobo. In Chinese, his name is Pu-tai (Hotei, in Japanese), 
the laughing Buddha with a big belly, arms upraised 
and a widely distended grin. Even the most moving, 
meditative Buddha-images – those of Khmer workmanship from eleventh- and twelfth-century Angkor 
Wat – harbour a serene, inward, almost sensuous

260
THE BROKEN GONG
archaic smile. As King Pasenadi of Kosala testified in 
his final, poignant remarks to the Buddha: ‘But here 
I see monks smiling and cheerful, sincerely joyful, 
plainly exuberant, their faculties fresh and unruffled, 
living by what others give, dwelling with minds aloof as
the wild deer.’32
Similarly, the Buddha must have seemed cheerfully 
at ease in his detachment from human foibles, as if only 
a keen sense of the absurd still exercised his mind. As in 
this sketch (already quoted) of a relentlessly enquiring, 
if terminally deluded, intellectual:
‘Suppose ... someone had been wounded by an arrow 
thickly smeared with poison and his friends and 
companions, relatives and kinsfolk, called for a surgeon; 
but he insisted: “I won’t have this arrow extracted till I 
know whether my assailant was of the warrior-noble caste, 
or the brahman caste, or the agricultural caste, or the
menial caste ...”’
running on and on about the archer’s name, his 
family, his height (whether tall, short or medium), 
his complexion (whether dark, brown or fair), his 
domicile (whether in this or that city, town or village), 
continuously shifting to more and more irrelevant, 
more ludicrous detail – the style of his bow (whether 
longbow or crossbow), of his bowstring (whether 
of fibre, or reed, or sinew, or hemp, or bark), of his 
arrow-shaft (whether wild or cultivated), of its binding 
(whether of ox-gut, or buffalo-gut, or lion- or monkeygut), of its feathering (whether a vulture’s, or hawk’s, 
or kite’s, or peacock’s, or crane’s), of its arrowhead 
(whether tipped, or curved, or barbed, or toothed)

261
HAROLD BEAVER
– until finally – inexhaustibly – the Buddha reached 
his reductio ad absurdum: ‘That man would die, 
Māluṇkyāputta ...’33 without completing even a fraction 
of his preliminary research.
But such insistent multiplication of detail was never 
indulged with caustic glee. Nor allowed to tumble 
viciously into farce. Nor to hint at ridicule, intended 
to wound or taunt. Nor to wallow in Swiftian ‘saeva 
indignatio’.34 It found expression, rather, in a subdued, 
affable, sly, down-to-earth, man-to-man approach, as 
in his jocular reply to Navika, the Ganges ferryman 
who had been ordained into the Sangha. When Navika 
asked him, ‘Lord, if anyone wonders who I am, what 
am I to say?’ the Buddha laughed: ‘Tell them you are a 
samaṇa, a Brahman, one proficient in wisdom, who has 
crossed over and reached the Further Shore’.35 In other 
words: ‘Say you’ve become a metaphor personified, a 
“stream-winner”, a ferryman of the wise and a living 
embodiment of the Dhamma.’
For Navika had passionately espoused the 
Dhamma, unlike those inept spoons, castigated in the 
Dhammapada, forever stirring soup and serving soup, 
without once absorbing ‘the taste of soup’:
‘Though all his life a foolish man 
Attends upon a wiser man,
No more of wisdom he discerns
Than spoons discern the taste of soup.
Though just for an hour a shrewd man 
Attends upon a wiser man,
Wisdom he rapidly discerns
As tongues discern the taste of soup.’36

262
THE BROKEN GONG
It’s a generous tribute. But the joke must have 
been aimed, in part at least, at pundits and Brahmans 
(the intellectuals of their day) endlessly investigating 
the Dhamma and dishing out the Dhamma, without 
ever personally experiencing the Dhamma. Flexible 
organs, after all, can both taste and speak. But why 
mock the dumb imperviousness of spoons? Aren’t 
spoons inevitably suffused by the temperature of the 
soup? Aren’t they more sensitive, more instantaneous 
conductors of their environment than the Buddha lets 
on? Which might well be part of the joke. Even the 
dumbest supporters are likely to be less thick-skinned, 
less casually apathetic than mere hangers-on.
*  *  *
It was with such kinds of playful, double-edged 
conceits that the Buddha engaged all comers: ferrymen, 
householders, pundits, Brahmans, especially your 
average punter who knew all about doubling stakes 
on a bet. As he memorably challenged the Kālāmas: 
‘If there’s no world beyond and so no fruit of kamma 
(either well-intentioned or ill-intentioned), still you’ll 
be exempt in this life from hostility and affliction ... And 
should even kamma turn out to be an illusion, you’ll still 
prove blameless here and now, winning respect from 
your fellow men and happiness for yourself.’ 37 ‘But, 
just think, should another world be confirmed,’ he 
sportingly added, ‘your single throw will have proved 
not once, but doubly, lucky: being both lauded here

263
HAROLD BEAVER
and rewarded hereafter.’38 So give it a try, he urged. It’s 
a wager, gentlemen, you can’t refuse. You’re covered 
against all the odds; everything runs in your favour; 
and the risk, either way, is nil.
Even with the merchant élite, he adopted this same 
man-to-man approach. As an ex-prince, no doubt, he 
knew all about the vagaries of wealth – its uncanny 
tendency to depreciate or diminish:
‘However well it be laid by 
Deep in a water-level pit, 
Not all of it will be enough 
To serve you all the time; perhaps 
The store gets shifted; or perhaps 
You foolishly forget the marks; 
Or Nāga-serpents haul it off;
Or spirits fritter it away;
Or else some heirs you can’t abide 
Abstract it while your back is turned ...’39
Which, roughly rendered in today’s terms, reads:
‘However ample your bank account, you’re bound to 
face occasional cash-flow problems until, one day, you’re 
shocked to discover an unauthorized transfer of funds just 
when your personal pass-code has expired. Or a sudden 
bear market develops. Or a downward plunge of the 
exchange-rate. Or your own legatees siphon off the bulk of 
your capital behind your back ...’
The Buddha clearly enjoyed such droll scenarios. 
‘Bhikkhus,’ he coaxed his disciples, ‘though you may 
yearn to free your minds from defilement, you won’t

264
THE BROKEN GONG
begin to succeed unless you devote yourselves to a 
steady programme of mental training.’ ‘Imagine,’ he 
continued, ‘a broody hen refusing to sit on her eggs 
to warm and hatch them. Yearn as she may for her 
chicks to claw and peck their way safely out of those 
eggs, it would be impossible for them to do so.’ 40 But 
why introduce this oddly restless bird? What exactly 
is her problem? Why isn’t she broody? Why isn’t she 
sedentary? In any case, defilements (āsāva) do not need 
incubating. Far from it! They are in constant eruption, 
instinct with organic life, scrabbling and scratching 
their way to our appalled attention. Because, for once, 
no allegory is intended. The whole point of the joke 
concerns only one aspect – though an essential aspect 
– of the farmyard scenario: ‘Persevere! Imitate broody 
hens in your practice of meditation! Life-processes take 
their time.’ It’s simply on patience that the Buddha was 
comically insisting.
*  *  *
For he was fond of broody hens, though casting 
himself in a more waggish, more disconcerting role. 
Since his jokes could also be deftly played at his 
own expense. As in this mock-heroic version of his 
Enlightenment:
THE BUDDHA: ‘Brahman, consider a hen with a clutch of 
eight, or ten, or twelve eggs over which she has brooded 
properly, properly incubated and hatched. What should 
we call the first chick to pierce its shell with claw or beak? 
Should we call it the youngest? Or the eldest?’

265
HAROLD BEAVER
THE BRAHMAN: ‘The eldest, Master Gotama, since it is the 
eldest of the clutch.’
THE BUDDHA: ‘Even so, Brahman, I alone pierced through 
the shell of ignorance for all those encased in ignorance – 
sealed in by ignorance. I am unique in the world, egg-born, 
utterly enlightened with unsurpassed enlightenment, the 
world’s eldest and foremost.’41
Not a broody hen, then, incubating his disciples: 
that we could readily accept. But this surrealistic, Max 
Ernst-like ‘Self-Portrait of the Tathāgata as NewlyHatched Squab’ must strike us, at the very least, as 
whimsical. Or, if not whimsical exactly, as bizarre; and 
it was clearly meant to be bizarre. For a fluffy chick, 
of all things, was claiming the world’s triumphant 
priority. The rhetorical name for such a dive from 
the sublime to the ridiculous is ‘bathos’. But, in the 
Buddha’s mouth, it hardly suggests bathos even. As 
in all his teaching, that unfledged Buddha-chick is 
completely and comfortably at one with the mysteries 
of nature. In the last resort, the joke is not so much on 
himself as on this whole amazing universe where such 
births are possible. ‘I am unique in the world, egg-born 
...’ the Buddha crows with a cocorico on the world’s 
dunghill – a comic variant (in this context) of his more 
customary ‘Lion’s Roar’.
And he remained a joker to the end, even turning 
his deathbed into a kind of celestial theatre:
Just then the Venerable Upavāna was standing in front of 
the Lord, fanning him. And the Buddha gestured him aside, 
saying: ‘Step to one side, bhikkhu! Don’t stand in my way!’

266
THE BROKEN GONG
‘But why?’ the Venerable Ānanda wondered. ‘The 
Venerable Upavāna has long attended intimately on the 
Lord – waiting on him at all times – always at his beck and 
call. Yet now, in his final hour, he’s asked him to step aside. 
What on earth could have made him say that?’
So the Venerable Ānanda enquired why the Lord had 
asked the Venerable Upavāna to step aside. The Buddha 
replied:
‘Ānanda, most of the devas from the ten world-spheres 
have assembled here to see the Tathāgata. For a distance 
of twelve leagues, around this bend of the road leading to 
Kusinārā, there isn’t a spot that can be reached by the tip 
of a hair not crowded with powerful devas. And the devas 
are grumbling, Ānanda. They are grumbling: “We have 
come a long way to see the Tathāgata. It is rare for a fullyenlightened Buddha to arise in the world and tonight – 
towards dawn – the Tathāgata will attain final nibbāna. Yet 
this brawny monk, standing in front of the Lord, is blocking 
our view and now we shan’t get a glimpse of the Tathāgata 
in his final hour!”’42
What Ānanda conceived as a personal tragedy 
(lamenting against a doorpost) was turned by the 
Buddha into a pop performance as he waved that hunk 
of a bhikkhu aside, casually translating his deathbed 
vigil into a cosmic auditorium – with sky-devas tearing 
their hair and earth-devas tumbling about on the floor

267
HAROLD BEAVER
– while the Superstar courteously acknowledged the 
restless grumbling of his fans.
Such are the comic asides of the metaphysical 
imagination, elsewhere scattered in logjams of 
hilarious incompatibilities and contradictions. Like 
that buffoon with a hoe intent on stripping ‘this great 
Earth’ of earth. 43 His intrusion, in itself, was signally 
odd in a spiritual context: that of maintaining lovingkindness under all manner of harassment and duress.44 
Why, then, his appearance? And what was he up to? 
Why such desperate scrabbling in the dirt?
‘When others address you,’ the Buddha had 
forewarned his disciples, ‘their speech may well be 
untimely, or false, or harsh, or otherwise spiteful and 
distressing. But you should train your minds to remain 
calm and unruffled; never to give vent to foul language; 
but always to preserve a compassionate regard not only 
for your interlocutors’ welfare but for the whole frame 
of this all-encompassing universe.’ 45 There followed a 
set of four parables mysteriously to enforce the theme:
‘Suppose someone came along, holding a basket and 
hoe, with just one thought in mind: “I shall strip this great 
Earth of earth.” So he set to digging holes here and there, 
scattering sand here and there, spitting and urinating in 
all directions, continually chanting: “Vanish earth! Vanish 
earth!” What do you think? Could he strip this great Earth 
of earth?’
Or again:

268
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Suppose someone came along with a dish of crimson 
or indigo powder, saying: “I shall draw pictures in space. 
I shall make pictures appear in this empty space.” What 
do you think? Could he paint in space? Could he make 
pictures materialize in empty space?’
Or again:
‘Suppose someone came along with a blazing grass-torch, 
saying: “I plan to heat up the waters of the Ganges with this 
burning torch.” What do you think? Could he heat up the 
River Ganges with a torch?’
Or again:
‘Suppose someone came along with a stick, saying: “Look 
at this catskin bag, ladies and gentlemen. Feel how sleek 
and soft and supple it is! How thoroughly well tanned! Now 
just watch me whack it until it crackles and pops.” What 
do you think? Could he make that skin pop and crackle by 
applying his stick?’
All quite mad, of course. Or, more likely, tricksters 
and charlatans travelling the country roads. But, 
again, why that space-painter here? Or that catskin 
man? Whose absurdist dramas rehearse one single, 
repeated theme: the inanity of various boastful 
enterprises which, by their very nature, are bound to 
be self-defeating? Each of their antics, note, are not 
just physical impossibilities, but logical absurdities to 
match the incomprehensible conundrum of absolute 
love in the face of those who hate us and persecute 
us. Genuine loving-kindness is bound to seem 
inconceivable and measureless as the Ganges, or Earth,

269
HAROLD BEAVER
or Space – and ultimately as paradoxical – if it is to 
frustrate all attempts at undermining or transforming 
it. Enlightened Love, as this cluster of anecdotes 
suggests, remains insoluble.
Logically insoluble, but not for that reason morose, 
or heavy-hearted, or tragic. Quite the contrary. The 
tone throughout these parables is essentially comic. 
That oddball attempting to cart off the earth from 
Earth is not engaged in some profound metaphysical 
enterprise. He’s earthy enough to spit and pee. His 
self-defeating, horny-handed routine is closer akin to a 
snatch of Samuel Beckett than of Schopenhauer. 
*  *  *
Such slapstick, too, illumines the Buddha’s 
persistent fondness for accumulating and multiplying 
burlesque detail. As in his account of the mounting 
hysteria of a man traumatized (so he claims) by a whole 
relay of predatory forces – four venomous snakes, 
a psychotic stalker lurking at his heels, a five-man 
death squad closing in to jump him from the rear – 
until panic-stricken, in headlong flight, he bumps into 
a gang of terrorists who cut off his retreat. 46 Or as in 
another more erotically charged, even more dreamlike 
cliffhanger where a bowl, brimming with oil, has to 
be carried between ‘a crowd of villagers and a local 
beauty queen’ with an executioner – sword upraised – 
breathing down the contestant’s neck. ‘Should he spill 
the least drop,’ lands the punchline, ‘that executioner 
will chop off his head!’47

270
THE BROKEN GONG
These knockabout farces and fantasies were 
presumably meant to shock. As this thriller, addressed 
to King Pasenadi of Kosala, was certainly meant
to shock:
‘What do you think, O King? Suppose a loyal and reliable 
man were to come to you from the east and say: “Your 
majesty, I have come from the east and there saw a huge 
mountain, as tall as the sky, advancing and crushing every 
living thing in its path.” And then a second were to come 
from the west ... a third from the north ... a fourth from the 
south, and approaching you should say: “Your majesty, I 
have come from the south and there saw a huge mountain, 
as tall as the sky, advancing and crushing every living thing 
in its path.” In such a predicament, O King, what would you 
do?’48
Those blundering juggernauts, uprooted from the 
Himalayas, rival Gothic fiction for nightmare intensity. 
That their marauding presence turns out to be ‘old 
age and death’ is largely irrelevant unless the King 
had already been bowled over by the sheer dynamism 
and sensational flair of the Buddha’s imagination as it 
unpredictably ranged from the sedate to the boisterous, 
from horizon to foreground, from horror to humour 
with equal abandon.
The same shock tactics were at work in his riddles, 
as we have already seen. Especially darker, more 
unsettling pronouncements such as this:
‘Mother and father having slain 
And then two warrior kings, a realm

271
HAROLD BEAVER
And its treasurer having slain, 
One goes immune, a Brahmana.’
‘Mother and father having slain 
And then two learned kings, the fifth 
A fearsome tiger having slain, 
One goes immune, a Brahmana.’49
But what can it mean? For once, no allegorical key 
is supplied. So it remains a riddling knot, or rune, for 
intuitive unravelling. Of only one thing we can be sure: 
that an Arahant is no Nietzschean Superman privileged 
to claim ‘immunity’ from good and evil. To the contrary, 
all killing is taboo. He may take no life whatsoever with 
conscious intent. Let alone the life of his own parents! 
As a later verse of the Dhammapada confirms:
‘Joyful to serve one’s mother here, 
To serve one’s father too is joy …’50
But the Buddha was never concerned with 
comprehension (as an ultimate goal) so much as 
spiritual apprehension. That sudden karate chop, 
or kick in the pants, was delivered to a party of 
visiting bhikkhus with startling effect: the monks 
all gained immediate enlightenment. The mockviolent, almost clownish rough-and-tumble of this 
aspect of the Buddha’s teaching was later to be given 
exclusive emphasis by the Chinese Ch’an and Japanese
Zen masters.
*  *  *

272
THE BROKEN GONG
Whatever is shocking, moreover, can usually be 
mocking. Especially when the joke is at an antagonist’s 
expense: Jains and Brahmans, for the most part, during 
the Buddha’s lifetime. A fine example of sustained 
ridicule being his dialogue with an ascetic (first met 
in Chapter 1) who had put to him a series of questions 
about the self (attā ). What exactly was the self? Was 
it, like the body, temporal and contingent? Or was it 
eternal? Before confronting these questions, some 
spurious assumptions needed to be exposed on which 
Brahman doctrines were based:
‘Poṭṭhapāda, some ascetics and Brahmans declare that, 
after a man’s death, his self – far from perishing with the 
body – lives on in eternal bliss. So I approached a number 
of them and enquired whether they shared this view.
‘“Yes, indeed,” they replied.
‘Then I asked: “Friends, have you ever experienced a world 
without suffering, that offers only bliss?”
‘“No,” they replied.
‘Again I asked: “Friends, have you personally experienced 
this state of bliss? If only for a night? Or a day? Or half a 
night? Or half a day?” “No,” again they replied.
‘So next I asked: “Friends, do your religious practices 
hasten the realization of this ever-blissful world?”
‘Yet again they declined ...’
The Buddha then clinched his argument by 
comparing such an imaginary state of bliss to a 
compulsive, though fictitious, love affair. Selfinfatuation, he implies, is as ludicrous – and unhealthy 
– as sexual fantasizing. The teasing mockery of his 
approach now becomes apparent:

273
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Poṭṭhapāda, isn’t this just like a lover sighing: “How I long 
for the most beautiful girl in the whole land!” But when 
asked, “Who is she? Does she belong to the ruling caste? 
Or the Brahman caste? Or the merchant caste? Or the 
artisan caste?” he replies: “I don’t know.” 
‘And when bombarded with prying questions, such as 
“What’s her name?” “Well, what’s her clan?” “How tall is 
she?” “Is she petite, then?” “Or of middling height?” “Is 
she dark-skinned or fair?” “Or of a golden complexion?” 
“In what village, or town, or city does she live?” he simply 
shrugs: “I don’t know.” 
‘So naturally people would say: “Young man, do you mean 
that you’re pining with love for a sweetheart you’ve never 
even seen?”
‘“That’s right,” he says.
‘Now, Poṭṭhapāda, what do you think? Don’t such lovepangs – or romantic daydreams, rather – turn out to be 
totally unfounded?
‘“Certainly, venerable sir, his love would have no 
justification.”
‘Poṭṭhapāda, I tell you, it’s the same with those ascetics 
and Brahmans who postulate a so-called “eternal self” 
but, under close questioning, admit that they have no 
personal, first-hand acquaintance with it.’51
So infatuation with ‘self’, the Buddha mischievously 
maintains, is as whimsical as a passionate urge for 
a wholly imaginary girl: without caste, without 
name, without clan, without vital statistics, without 
complexion, without address – unseen, unknown, 
undiscoverable, absurd.
*  *  *

274
THE BROKEN GONG
Sometimes tart, then, he could also be surprisingly 
scathing, when irritated by another’s wit (for instance), 
or attempted wit, or apparent wit. During a discourse 
on impermanence, before a large congregation, this 
thought flashed through a bhikkhu’s mind:
‘So, it seems, form is not-self; feeling is not-self; perception 
is not-self; ideas are not-self; consciousness is not-self. 
Then what “self” exactly will these deeds [kammas], 
engendered by the not-self, affect?’52
The Buddha, scanning for a public reaction, at once 
singled him out. ‘Is it possible,’ he observed, ‘that some 
misguided man – some ignoramus obsessed by craving 
– might presume to outstrip his Master’s teaching?’; 
and he proceeded, word for word, to repeat the thought 
that had flashed through the bhikkhu’s mind.
Unlike Socrates, of course, the Buddha could 
thought-read. To him, other minds were transparent; 
the poor monk had not even voiced his doubts. But 
why did the Buddha surreptitiously pick on this one 
particular monk? Why the personal abuse? The heavy 
irony? And careful anonymity? Why call the fellow a 
nitwit? Why expose him at all? Why broadcast aloud 
his muddled predicament? Why, finally, dangle his 
private misconception verbatim, like some filthy rag, 
before the gathered assembly? As misguided as the 
monk may have been, what was so exasperating about 
his query? Why, one cannot help wondering, was the 
Buddha’s reaction so highly charged?

275
HAROLD BEAVER
For, on the face of it, the question seems surprisingly 
astute. It logically derives from the very arguments 
which the Buddha had step by step been presenting; so 
if the young man’s grasp of their logic had gone astray, 
it surely deserved a patient, dialectical response: that 
‘intention’ or ‘will’ (cetana), however veiled, constitutes 
the very essence of kamma; and unprofitable deeds 
would indubitably spring from such self-conscious 
elaboration.53 But, as if this were too tiresome to 
expound yet again, the Buddha merely reiterated the 
doctrine of impermanence, word for word repeating 
the discourse that had triggered the puzzle in the first 
place. Though that in itself was not the puzzle running 
through the monk’s mind.
Furthermore, the Buddha condemned the monk’s 
naïve, though logical, move not only as ‘obsessed by 
craving’ (as if it were hypocritically self-promoting 
and instinctively vicious), but also as competitive in 
some nasty way, springing from an urge to upstage his 
teacher. Since the Buddha was omniscient, we have to 
take his word for it; perhaps such impromptu licence 
was in itself offensive. The problem of kamma, as 
transferred from Hindu to Buddhist practice, remains 
highly elusive and complex. In theory at least, if not 
in practice. Far from wilful, the monk’s confused and 
paradoxical formulation may strike a contemporary 
reader as both witty and sympathetic.54
But one thing the Buddha was not accustomed to 
facing in others was wit; and wit, of course, can usually be 
shown to be some kind of insubordination. Perhaps that

276
THE BROKEN GONG
explains his sudden outburst of petulance. The kindest 
assumption is that he realized the dangers inherent in 
language for confusing and outmanoeuvring the stepby-step clarity of his own compulsive logic. His sense 
of the limits implicit in verbal exposition, as a means 
to non-verbal transcendence, was always acute. In this 
rare instance, it seems, the Buddha was suddenly and 
precariously thrown off-balance.
*  *  *
For he could certainly be irked: by too much bustle 
and chat in the monastery, for instance. 55 Worse still, 
by dissention in the Sangha: ‘stabbing with verbal 
daggers’, as it was called.56 Three times the Buddha had 
to intervene at Kosambi (a particularly quarrelsome 
monastery) in an effort to stop the brawling. But 
each time he was effectively sidelined; the infighting 
continued, until he was forced to withdraw.
What irked him above all, however, were muddleheadedness and imprecision. And interruptions which 
vitiated the lucid rigour of his disquisitions. 57 Already 
piqued, on one occasion, at hearing how a young 
bhikkhu had failed to analyse correctly a garbled text 
(though quoted verbatim, allegedly), he felt further 
baited and put upon by what he clearly considered a 
wholly uncalled-for – if not impertinent – intervention:
‘I don’t even know the wanderer by sight, Ānanda. How 
could there have been such a conversation? The wanderer 
Potaliputta’s question ought to have been answered after

277
HAROLD BEAVER
due analysis, but this misguided man Samiddhi answered 
it without qualifications.’
On hearing this, the Venerable Udāyin broke in: ‘But, 
sir, supposing when the Venerable Samiddhi spoke, he 
merely meant “Whatever is felt is suffering”.’ Then the 
Buddha turned pointedly to the Venerable Ānanda: ‘Do 
you see how this misguided man Udāyin intervenes? 
As soon as I saw him I knew that this misguided man 
would rashly interfere ...’58 
Though the strongest pejoratives the Buddha 
usually allowed himself were ‘foolish’, or ‘thoughtless’, 
or ‘unreasonable’, here again he bitterly harps on ‘this 
misguided man Samiddhi’ and ‘this misguided man 
Udāyin’, repeating the phrase five times with mounting 
sarcasm, before letting the matter drop.
What threw him were always such intrusions on 
either his outer or his inner calm: the ordered regimen 
of monastic life and the ordered regimen of his mind. 
For interruptions were uncontrollable and what he 
prized, above all, was mental and physical self-control. 
Thus the louring gaze, the peevish reprimand. As if such 
thoughtless spontaneity were the ultimate vulgarity, 
the spiritual equivalent of heckling. It brought out his 
grimmest ill-humour.
*  *  *
More than sardonic, he could be abrasive as well 
as dismissively contemptuous (of astrologers, say). 
He ridiculed every kind of ritual hocus-pocus. ‘If river

278
THE BROKEN GONG
water could really wash away sin and suffering,’ he 
once scoffed:
‘then the frogs, fish, turtles and crabs bathing in those 
sacred rivers should long ago have been relieved of their 
sufferings too ... If a man could eliminate pain by simply 
making offerings and obeisances, there should by now be 
no pain in the world, since anyone can pay homage and 
pray. But as pain pervades even the rituals of prayer, that 
clearly cannot be the path to liberation.’59
Not only Hindu cults were derided. The Buddha 
had nothing but scorn for Brahman insistence on 
caste-stratification in Hindu society, comparing it 
to ‘thrusting a joint of meat on a penniless man, 
then telling him to eat and pay for it!’ 60 And that in 
a predominantly vegetarian culture! Such sudden 
imaginative spins, such feline pounces, must often 
have roused resentment. Were they calculated to 
irritate? They certainly had this effect on young Subha, 
a Brahman student, intent on interviewing the Buddha 
on the pros and cons of a ‘household’ versus a ‘homeless’ 
(monastic or wandering) life. But the Buddha undercut 
all aspects of brahmanical lore on the grounds of their 
not being arrived at first-hand (from experience), but 
at second- and third- and fourth-hand (through study 
of the Vedas). ‘Imagine,’ he exclaimed, switching to an 
image as familiar on roads then as it was for Flemish 
Breughel two thousand years later,
‘Imagine a file of blind men, each man clinging to the next 
one’s arm or back or shoulder. Neither the first, nor the 
second, nor the last can see. So it is with the Brahmans.

279
HAROLD BEAVER
Their leader can’t see; his follower doesn’t see; and his 
follower’s followers don’t see.’61
Calling the Brahman tradition one of ‘the blind 
leading the blind’, 62 however, proved inopportune, or 
at least counterproductive, on this occasion: by visually 
dramatizing the argument, that is, the Buddha seemed 
openly to taunt and disparage the young Brahman who 
at once turned angrily dismissive, muttering something 
like: ‘We’ll see about that! I’ll soon make him eat his 
words! Gotama Bhikkhu will be proved mistaken!’
But the Buddha was used to such charges and 
counter-charges. His hide was tough. When really 
riled, however – by a disrobed monk who had openly 
ridiculed him before the Vesālī assembly – he ritually 
cursed his opponent: ‘Unless Sunakkhatta recants 
his slander, unless he publicly drops his charge, he’ll 
find himself hauled off to hell!’ 63 hammering home his 
prophetic curse again and again and again and again. 
The main target for such ritual anathemas, though, was 
his cousin and rival, Devadatta. For which in turn he 
was slandered by Jains who maliciously treasured each 
virulent phrase to use against him:
‘Devadatta is a nefarious nihilist; 
Devadatta belongs in hell;
Devadatta will remain in hell for all eternity; 
Devadatta is incorrigible.’64
Nor were such ritual curses empty threats. Five of 
the Buddha’s most vicious detractors were swallowed 
live by the earth, according to Buddhist folklore:

280
THE BROKEN GONG
Devadatta, while attempting to murder his cousin and 
rival;65 Devadatta’s father, while drunkenly obstructing 
the Buddha on a highway;66 Nandaka, the ogre (yakkha) 
who had struck Sāriputta a blow on the head; 67 Ciñca, 
a Brahman woman, cajoled by the Buddha’s enemies 
into accusing him of making her pregnant; 68 and lastly 
Nanda, the Brahman youth, for raping the beautiful 
nun Upalavaṇṇa, who was an Arahant.69
*  *  *
Self-mortification may, in retrospect, have helped 
in detaching and disciplining and toughening the 
Buddha. A prolonged hunger-strike in his early 
thirties, attended by headaches and stomach cramps, 
had rapidly accelerated into a gut-wrenching crisis:70
‘I thought: suppose I take less and less food, just a handful 
each time, whether of bean soup, or lentil soup, or 
pea soup? So I did. And as I did, my body contracted to 
skeletal proportions: my limbs shrank to jointed segments 
of bamboo or withered creepers, because of eating so 
little; my buttocks grew calloused as a camel’s hoof; my 
spine protruded like a string of beads; my ribs jutted out 
as gaunt as rafters on a roofless barn; my eyes, sunk deep 
in their sockets, gleamed like water far down a well; my 
scalp shrivelled as a ripe gourd withers in wind and sun. 
If I pressed my belly, I touched my backbone; feeling my 
backbone, I encountered my belly. For my belly-skin stuck 
to my backbone. Whenever I passed water or emptied 
my bowels, I fell flat on my face. If I tried easing myself

281
HAROLD BEAVER
by rubbing my limbs, the rotting hairs rubbed off on my 
hands because of eating so little.’71
Feverish – and racked with pain – he would crawl on 
all fours to the cow-sheds, after the cattle had left for 
pasture, to lick up the young calves’ dung:
‘As long as my own excrement and urine lasted, I fed on 
that ... I would bed down at night in a charnel ground, with 
bones for a pillow, where herd boys would creep up to spit 
on me and piss on me, chuck dirt at me and poke sticks 
into my ears.’72
This close-up of the Tathāgata as cadaverous 
grotesque constitutes, as it happens, the only explicit 
self-portrait that has come down to us: limbs, ribs, 
spine, buttocks, eyes, scalp, skin, hair, every detail 
from top to toe meticulously itemized and anatomized 
and recorded. Though later he gave up such orgies 
of self-humiliation, they were to be frequently and 
elaborately recalled. It could even be argued that the 
comic virtuosity of his Buddhahood was in some ways 
dependent on that highly-strung, yet coolly objective, 
experiment. For what he continuously trained on this 
frenzied and feverish world was the same intense, 
unflinching, dispassionate gaze he had earlier turned 
on his own agonized and emaciated physique.

8
A peculiar problem of Pali literature is the total absence 
of comparative texts. Non-Buddhist or wholly secular 
texts, that is. For much of the language of the suttas 
must have been of popular origin. Proverbial sayings 
clearly abounded:
‘One hand washes the other as one foot the other.’
‘If a man’s reputation suffers, his income suffers.’
‘A clean cloth, from which all stains have been removed, 
takes the dye perfectly.’1
When a Brahman, to snub his quick-witted spouse, 
tells her: ‘Wife, you are always seeing a crocodile in a 
drop of water!’2 he is hardly likely to have been original. 
His pompous self-assurance, not shrewd wit in that 
context, was at issue.
The Buddha naturally shared a whole range of such 
folksy idioms. Even in verse. When unmasking Māra, 
for example, he exclaimed:

283
HAROLD BEAVER
‘I recognize your ploys – 
Of whatsoever kind – to be as vain
As a ship’s oars and rudder on dry land,’3
this was certainly no novel jeu d’esprit, but as old and 
hackneyed as Māra’s tricks, or sayings like ‘buying a pig 
in a poke’, or ‘bleeding like a stuck pig’, or waiting ‘until 
pigs might fly’, are for us. Again, when on visiting three 
fellow-hermits, the Buddha enquired:
‘I hope you all live in harmony, Anuruddha, as undisputing 
as milk with water, viewing each other with kindly eyes,’4
his was a standard formula of extreme courtesy, we 
must assume, not some wilfully extravagant bon mot. It 
can be heard dolefully echoed by a very much chastened 
King Pasenadi on his final visit to the Buddha: ‘But here 
I see bhikkhus living in harmony, as undisputing as 
milk with water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.’5
A long list of catchphrases could be compiled, none 
of which – in all likelihood – is of unique coinage. Take 
the stock epithet for monastic calm, for instance: ‘as 
utterly pure and polished as a conch-shell’. 6 Or the 
figura from archery as emblematic of tense self-control: 
‘just as a well-trained archer can nimbly shoot an arrow 
across a palm’s shadow’. 7 Or the posturing of a muscle 
man to signal sudden and unexpected transport:
‘When the Lord came to the Ganges, the river was so full to 
overflowing that even a crow could drink out of it ... But as 
swiftly as a strong man can flex his extended arm or again 
unflex it, the Blessed One vanished from the near bank of

284
THE BROKEN GONG
the Ganges and reappeared with his Sangha of bhikkhus 
on the far shore.’8
And mark that intrusive crow!
All these were commonplaces, though they may 
sound as fresh and vigorous to our ears as similar 
turns of phrase in Homer or Chaucer. They naturally 
suited the Buddha’s homely style. As when – caught 
off guard by five hundred monks, headed by Sāriputta 
and Maha-Moggallāna, bursting into his retreat, 
exchanging greetings, preparing beds, storing bowls 
and outer robes – he expostulated: ‘Ānanda, what’s 
this riff-raff doing here? They’re as noisy as fishermen 
peddling fish!’ 9 Or, on another occasion, upset by an 
incursion of Brahman families bringing food-offerings, 
he exclaimed: ‘Nagita, what’s all this hubbub about? It 
beats fishermen landing a prize catch!’10
Nor did he shy away altogether from low talk. He 
could participate in the coarsest slang. For example, 
while expelling Devadatta for conspiring to hijack his 
Order, he disdainfully sank to his antagonist’s abusive 
level:
‘I would not hand over the Sangha of bhikkhus even to 
Sāriputta and Moggallāna. Then why should I deliver it to 
such a good-for-nothing gob of spittle as you?’11
Free-for-all slanging-matches, of course, were to be 
avoided, but their very verve may have helped tip his 
natural bias towards comic exaggeration.
*  *  *

285
HAROLD BEAVER
For hyperbole is the hallmark of slanging. Not of 
slang only, but of grossness, of vulgarity, as well as of 
all untrammelled flights of the imagination:
‘Idiots, you’ve tried to split a rock 
By dabbing it with lily stems;
To dig a hollow with bare hands; 
To chew up iron with your teeth; 
Secure a foothold on a cliff, 
Balancing boulders on your heads; 
Or shove a tree down with your chests. 
Of course, you’ve come from Gotama 
Frustrated and discomfited.’12
This is Māra piling up paradox on paradox to 
humiliate his three daughters – Craving (Taṇhā ), 
Boredom (Aratī) and Lechery (Ragā) – after their failure 
to seduce the Buddha. But a Buddhist catechism could 
be even more breathtaking in its hyperbolic display:
QUESTION: ‘How long is one cycle of time?’
ANSWER: ‘Longer than a mountain of solid rock – a league 
in length, a league in breadth, a league in height – without 
crack or flaw takes to erode when wiped, once every 
hundred years, with a silk handkerchief.’
QUESTION: ‘How long are the cycles of rebirth?’
ANSWER: ‘Imagine the bones of a single human being in 
transit from birth to birth raked here into a pile; that pile 
would dwarf the whole of the Himalayan range stacked 
vertically peak on peak. Imagine every stalk, stick, bough 
and twig hereabouts gathered in a heap, each named for 
a mother and a mother’s mother and a mother’s mother’s 
mother; the supply of stalks and sticks and boughs and

286
THE BROKEN GONG
twigs would run out before counting the mothers of all 
those mothers ... Imagine the whole earth rolled into pellets 
the size of cola seeds and itemized thus: “This is my father, 
this my father’s father, this my father’s father’s father”; the 
earth itself would be exhausted before enumerating all the 
fathers of those fathers.’13
QUESTION: ‘What are the odds on returning from hell to 
the human realm?’
ANSWER: ‘Suppose someone threw a yoke, drilled with a 
hole, into the ocean where it tossed from East to West and 
from North to South; then suppose a blind turtle popped 
its head above the surface once every hundred years. What 
do you think? Would that turtle eventually poke its head 
through that borehole? Bhikkhus, I tell you, the blind turtle 
would sooner penetrate that hole than a fool, gone to 
perdition, would find his way back to the human state.’14
QUESTION: ‘What are our filial duties towards our parents?’
ANSWER: ‘Even should you cart your parents about 
on piggyback for the rest of their lives, massaging and 
anointing and feeding them, you would still be in their 
debt; even should they do nothing but piss and shit on 
your shoulders, you could never repay them.’
Such dizzying perspectives were the very stuff of 
the Indian imagination in its recurrent shifts from the 
divine to the human and back to the divine. After the 
merest glimpse of heaven, Prince Nanda reviled his 
once beloved fiancée in these outrageous terms:
‘Lord, the Sakyan beauty Janapadakalyānī is like a 
scalded she-monkey – with ears and nose lopped off – 
compared to these five hundred dove-footed yakshas.

287
HAROLD BEAVER
She can’t hold a candle to them. She’s not got the ghost of 
a chance. There’s no earthly comparison.’15
*  *  *
The Dhammapada seems particularly rich in 
telltale reminders of its folklore origins, though only 
single images, unsustained by narrative hints or 
extrapolations, usually survive. Especially of animal 
fables with their cast of crows and lions, bees and 
spiders, elephants and hares. Like proverbs, their 
cautionary mode suggests the last trace or distillation 
of an implied narrative, as if they were summing up a 
far more elaborate account, no longer extant, in one 
terse epigraph. What Walter Benjamin compared to 
visible ruins on some archaeological site of otherwise 
vanished stories.
Oral transmission, as I argued earlier, was more 
likely to contract than expand such ornamental – or, 
as we might say, literary – aspects of the Dhamma. 
Such solo images may well have been more expansive 
before being anthologized: that queer catalogue of ten 
heterogeneous items, for instance, discussed in Chapter 
5.16 There seven tales, unique to the Potaliya Sutta 
(Majjhima Nikāya  54), were found in exactly the same 
sequence reduced to a list (with addenda) peculiar to 
the Alagaddūma Sutta ( Majjhima Nikāya 22): its jumble 
of bare bones, a lump of flesh, a torch of straw, a pit 
of burning coals, a dream, borrowed goods, a fruitbearing tree, a slaughterhouse, a palisade of swords and

288
THE BROKEN GONG
a snake’s head becoming intelligible only as kernels, 
or remnants, or memos of already familiar stories. In 
much the same way, the complete 423 quatrains of the 
Dhammapada constitute a mnemonic list of markers to 
an obviously well-known Buddhist repertoire.
*  *  *
 Key sources of such metaphoric sites, then, were 
proverbs, or folk tales, or a mixture of both, though 
often reduced to merest echoes:
‘Life is easy for one who is 
Shameless and bold as a crow, who 
Aggressively slanders others 
While wantonly bragging himself.’17
Which reappears, almost word for word, in a more 
obviously proverbial context: ‘Easy is the livelihood of 
the crow – that boldly aggressive bird – whose deeds 
are shameless; but it is a most evil life.’ 18 Possibly even 
closer to its folkloric origins was the Tempter (Māra) 
encircling the Buddha with his sly enchantments:
‘A crow there was who stalked around 
A stone that seemed a lump of lard. 
“Shall I gulp down this morsel? Fat’s tasty enough to 
gobble up.”’19
Yet such instances seem rare.
Full-scale, unmutilated folk tales, however, 
undoubtedly do survive. Take the story of the blind 
men and the elephant. As a Buddhist text, it was used

289
HAROLD BEAVER
to make fun of disputes arising out of partial or fugitive 
experience. But in its inventive wit, it clearly predates, 
and overrides, any purely Buddhist interpretation:
‘In Sāvatthī, once upon a time, the king commanded all 
men blind from birth to assemble before an elephant. 
First, one group was led to feel the elephant’s head; then 
another to feel each ear; yet another only its tusks; or its 
trunk; or its belly; or its hooves; or its rump; or its penis; or 
the tuft at the end of its tail, each being assured that “that’s 
what an elephant was like.”
‘Eventually the king enquired: “Now tell me, blind men, 
can you describe what an elephant’s like?” Then those 
who had felt only the elephant’s head replied: “Your 
majesty, an elephant is like a water-jar.” Those who had 
felt only his ears replied: “Your majesty, an elephant is like 
a winnowing-basket.” Those who had felt only his tusks 
replied: “Your majesty, an elephant is like a ploughshare.” 
Those who had felt only his trunk replied: “Your majesty, 
an elephant is like a plough-pole.” Those who had felt 
only his belly replied: “Your majesty, an elephant is like a 
granary.” Those who had felt only his hooves replied: “Your 
majesty, an elephant is like four plinths.” Those who had 
felt only his rump replied: “Your majesty, an elephant is 
like a mortar.” Those who had felt only his penis replied: 
“Your majesty, an elephant is like a pestle.” Those who had 
felt only the tuft at the end of his tail replied: “Your majesty, 
an elephant is like a fly-whisk.”
‘At which point they began arguing and quarrelling so 
heatedly that they swung their fists at each other, shouting:

290
THE BROKEN GONG
“No, not like that! An elephant’s like this!” “That’s not at all 
what an elephant’s like!” Which cheered the king, who was 
diverted by their brawling.’20
Or again, take the fable of the Partridge, the Monkey 
and the Elephant, deployed by the Buddha to urge the 
principle of seniority upon bhikkhus competing for 
precedence on the basis of caste, or liturgical expertise, 
or spiritual achievement:
‘Once upon a time, on the slopes of Mount Himavat, grew 
a huge banyan tree under which resided a partridge, 
a monkey and an elephant. Having little in common, 
they took scant notice of each other, yet couldn’t help 
wondering which of them was the eldest, thus outranking 
his neighbours.
‘So one day the partridge and the monkey asked the 
elephant: “How far back, sir, can you remember?” “When 
I was a calf, my good sirs, I used to walk over this banyan, 
scrupulously aligning it between my thighs; the tips of its 
shoots would just tickle my belly. That’s as far back, sirs, as 
I can remember.”
‘Next the partridge and the elephant asked the monkey: 
“How far back, sir, can you remember?” “When I was a 
baby, my good sirs, I used to squat on the ground, nibbling 
the tips of the shoots of this banyan. That’s as far back, sirs, 
as I can remember.”
‘Finally, the monkey and the elephant asked the partridge: 
“How far back, sir, can you remember?” “When I was a 
youngster, my good sirs, a huge banyan grew over there 
in that clearing. I ate one of its fruits and voided the seed 
right here. From which sprang our present banyan.”
‘Thereupon the monkey and the elephant respectfully

291
HAROLD BEAVER
deferred to the partridge: “You, sir, by rights are our senior. 
In future, we shall honour and obey your every precept, 
wish or command.”’21
Both tales were among the best-loved in the whole 
Canon.
*  *  *
Yet this fable of the Partridge is picked up verbatim 
in an uncanonical Jātaka tale (37), 22 just as the fable of 
the Falcon is retold as a Jātaka tale (168).23 Which, then, 
was their source? Were both of the Buddha’s making, 
only later winning widespread popularity? Or were 
both of folk origin (as I believe) and merely adapted to 
the Buddha’s purposes? Or was the traffic perhaps twoway? The tale of the Wise and Foolish Caravan-Leader 
(found in Dīgha Nikāya 23) is a possible source for Jātaka 
1,24 just as the tale of the Poisoned Dice (in the same 
sutta) is a possible source for Jātaka 91. 25 Or do both 
versions perhaps derive from a single lost source?
The tale of the Falcon is the most arresting of all 
these parallels:26
‘Once upon a time, a she-falcon swooped down and seized 
a quail. Sailing through the air, the quail lamented: “Trust 
my luck! I lack merit. Serves me right for trespassing on 
others’ property. If only I’d stuck to my ancestral pastures 
this falcon could never have bested me!”
‘“But tell me, quail, what are your ancestral pastures?”
‘“A field, all covered with clods, turned up by the plough.”

292
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Then the falcon, disdainfully relaxing her grip, replied: “Off 
with you, quail! Back to your pastures! But don’t think you 
can dodge me!” 
‘So the quail flew back to the ploughed land and, perching 
on a clod, called out: “Try diving now, falcon! Dive down, 
I dare you!”
‘Momentarily dropping her guard, the falcon folded back 
her wings and swooped down upon the quail. In a trice, 
though, the quail had slipped within a crack of the earth 
and the falcon crashed, shattering her breast.’
That is the fable as the Buddha told it; but in its 
uncanonical (Jātaka) version the Future Buddha himself 
was reborn as a quail who outwitted a falcon. Which 
is very much in the spirit of the Afro-American Uncle 
Remus cycle with little Sis Quail tricking Sis Falcon just 
as (in Jātaka 357) she has her ghastly revenge on Brer 
Elephant for maliciously trampling her chicks. 27 That 
tale, too, needs recalling at length:
‘Once upon a time, a bull-elephant with a retinue of 
eighty-thousand followers made his home in the foothills 
of the Himalayas. By chance, a quail laid her eggs in 
the elephants’ stamping-ground. When the eggs were 
hatched – but before her chicks could fly – fearful of their 
being crushed, she courteously begged the elephant-king 
for protection. “Don’t worry, I’ll protect your little ones,” 
he assured her and stood guard over her nest while the 
eighty-thousand elephants trampled by. Then he added, 
“But there’s a solitary bull in the rear who won’t listen to 
me. You’ll have to ask him personally for his protection.”

293
HAROLD BEAVER
‘So the quail flew to meet this solitary bull and, courteously 
folding her wings, begged him to spare her little ones.
‘But the bull merely snorted: “I shall kill your ‘little ones’ , 
quail. You’re too feeble to injure me. Even a hundredthousand like you, I could crush with my left hoof.”
‘And he smashed her chicks with one step and flushed 
them away in a torrent of piss. Then he shambled off  
trumpeting.
‘The quail perched on a branch, plotting revenge: “For 
strength does not always prevail. Furious is the strength 
of a fool. Elephant, I’ll avenge myself on you for trampling 
my darlings.”
‘Over the next few days she ingratiated herself with a crow 
who was so taken in that he asked what he might do for 
her in return. “Just one thing, Master,” replied the quail. 
“Please peck out the eyes of that solitary bull.” “Very well,” 
agreed the crow.
‘Next she ingratiated herself with a blowfly until she too 
asked what she might do for her in return. “As soon as that 
bull’s eyes are gouged, please fill their sockets with nits.” 
“Very well,” agreed the blowfly. 
‘Next she ingratiated herself with a frog until he too 
asked what he could do for her in return. “Once that bullelephant is blinded and dying of thirst, please croak from 
above till he has clambered uphill; then hop back below 
and continue croaking till he has stumbled down. That’s 
all I ask.” “Very well,” agreed the frog.
‘So one fine day the crow pecked out both the elephant’s 
eyes and the blowfly laid nits in their sockets until the 
elephant, maddened by the maggots – thrashing blindly 
about to quench his thirst – heard a frog croaking above. 
Desperately he clambered uphill. At which point he heard

294
THE BROKEN GONG
a frog croaking below. Stumbling back, down and down, 
he plunged over a precipice and was crushed.
‘When the quail heard the crash, she exulted: “I’ve seen the 
back of my enemy!” and strutted a dance of victory on the 
bull-elephant’s prostrate shoulder.’
*  *  *
Like Brer Rabbit outwitting Brer Fox, Brer Wolf, 
Brer Coon, Brer Possum, etc., the quail is a prototype 
of a vulnerable, though unscrupulous, victim revealed 
as folk-heroine. ‘Even the quail, that small bird,’ ran a 
proverb, ‘can talk as she likes on her own nest.’ 28 Tiny, 
but canny, she repeatedly triumphs over the huge, the 
fierce, the strong. Her exultant cry, ‘I’ve seen the back 
of my enemy!’ is echoed by the Future Buddha in the 
Jātaka version of the falcon’s dive.
Though a far more gruesome and ruthless trickster 
than we usually tolerate, she appeals to the underdog 
in us all; and the Future Buddha was reborn on at least 
two more occasions in her guise. In Jātaka 35, as a quailchick, newly hatched, still unable to fly: though the 
runt of the brood (from rejecting live titbits offered by 
his parents), single-handedly he overcomes a terrifying 
forest blaze. In Jātaka 33, however, the trickster is 
tricked through no fault of his own. Reborn as a quailcock ‘with a retinue of many thousand quails’, he finally 
fails to outwit a fowler on account of the quarrelsome 
and argumentative character of his fellow-quails.29

295
HAROLD BEAVER
What seems odd, though, is that the Buddha (or his 
later redactors) did not aim the Parable of the Falcon at 
the suicidal recklessness of the raptor. Since at heart she 
despised the silly quail, the falcon first relaxed her grip 
and then dropped her guard. 30 Why should a handicap 
bother her? Such petty prey had a lesson to learn! That 
impertinence was futile – even on home ground! But 
she was sporting with a far trickier adversary than she 
reckoned. It’s the old adage, ‘Pride goes before a fall,’ 
that we are bound to recall.
But that was not the Buddha’s objective. Nor his 
moral. What he wished to stress, above all, was the 
inquisitive, restless, incautious roaming of the quail. 
His resounding moral was ‘Don’t stray off your own 
turf! Don’t trespass on prohibited ground! Else you’ll be 
caught in the claws of your adversaries.’ Such a lopsided 
moral plainly points to a rather different pre-Buddhist 
bias, or kernel, at variance with the Buddha’s version, 
just as surely as a rather different comic tale underlies 
the Parable of the Monkey appended to it. 31 As if to 
clinch matters, the two texts are not only juxtaposed 
but linked by a common introduction and conclusion.
But that selfsame tag, ‘Stick to your own patch; 
don’t stray on to prohibited ground,’ turns out to be 
an even more inappropriate guide for construing the 
shenanigans of the monkey:
‘Throughout the Himalayas are regions so elevated that 
neither monke11s nor men can survive; and certain less 
elevated regions so rugged that only monkeys venture 
there. But below that extends an upland terrain in which 
both men and monkeys delight.

296
THE BROKEN GONG
‘There sadists torment the monkeys by spreading lime on 
their trails. Wise and temperate monkeys simply avoid the 
lime. But a foolish and greedy monkey is bound to dab the 
strange stuff with his hand. And there it sticks! “I’ll tug at it 
with my other hand,” he thinks. Now both hands stick! “I’ll 
shove my foot in and heave,” he thinks. Now that’s stuck 
too! Then he tries with the other foot. Now both are stuck! 
“I’ll free both hands and feet,” he thinks, tearing at them 
with clenched jaws. Now even his face is fast!
‘So there he rocks, curled up in a ball – with his hands, feet, 
mouth, face smeared with lime – where men can skewer 
him at their leisure and roast him on a bed of coals.’
To us, this reads like a folksy analogue (in an Asian 
setting) to ‘Brer Rabbit and the Tar-Baby’. Which of the 
two, we may ask, is more impulsive, the monkey or Brer 
Rabbit? And aren’t both as reckless in their different 
ways as the falcon? But the Buddha blithely skipped 
all such aspects of the fable. Neither the rapacity (of 
the falcon) nor inquisitive greed (of the monkey) 
was of even marginal interest. The Buddha’s sole and 
characteristic concern was to hammer home a single 
lesson: don’t pry, stray, trespass, explore and expose 
yourself unguarded on prohibited ground. Ignoring 
the inconvenient fact that the lime had been spread 
on the monkeys’ own trails! Whoever supposed those 
trails constituted alien ground? Whoever exhorted the 
monkeys to desist from travelling there?
*  *  *

297
HAROLD BEAVER
If the fit between parable and folk tale at times 
seems partial, at other times the very stories-as-stories 
fail to carry conviction. This failure is inevitably due 
to interpretative pressures which overdetermine, and 
so undermine, normal narrative expectations. In the 
Parable of the Snake, Crocodile, Bird, Dog, Jackal and 
Monkey, for instance, each is tethered to a rope whose 
other end is tied to a single post:
‘Now, monks, these six animals with different ranges and 
diets would swing round and struggle, each trying to 
head for his natural habitat: the snake, for an ant-hill; the 
crocodile, for water; the bird, for the upper air; the dog, 
for a village; the jackal, for a charnel-ground; the monkey, 
for the jungle. But, wearied with struggling, they would 
eventually yield to whoever was strongest.’32
Really? Far from struggling in their separate ways 
for air, water, jungle, etc., wouldn’t they, as likely as 
not, set on each other: crocodile snapping up dog; snake 
devouring bird or monkey; jackal mopping up the 
carnage? Something vital is suppressed which makes 
nonsense of the Buddha’s explication. Those six could 
never crouch together as selflessly as our faculties in 
meditation; nor is it clear just why a snake, crocodile, 
bird, etc. were ever chosen to represent eye, ear, nose, 
mind, etc. in the first place.
The homiletic aim is transparent enough. But oral 
improvisation, like the requisitioning of folklore, can 
lead to awkward tangles.

298
THE BROKEN GONG
*  *  *
Such transpositions of human foibles or failings 
into bestial forms, or vice versa, became a hallmark 
of the Buddha’s teaching. Its very touchstone even, 
since the non-human world (it was believed) not only 
commented on but reflected – at a further spin of the 
wheel of rebirth (saṃsāra) – the human condition with 
all its ingrained habits, its feuds and attachments. 
Or, put another way, a Buddhist bestiary could be 
compiled to define and illustrate that teaching, since 
ultimately both man and beast were part of a single 
cyclical consciousness. Had not the Buddha, uniquely 
conscious of his reincarnations, instant recall of all 
previous brushes with the vicious and virtuous? 33 
As King of the Parrots, for example, he had roosted 
in a grove of fig-trees on the banks of the Ganges (in 
anticipation, no doubt, of the Bodhi tree under which 
he was to win enlightenment); or as a timid fawn, he 
had confronted the evil Devadatta as deer-stalker. 34 
These ever-popular tales of the five hundred and fifty 
births of the Buddha, prior to his final birth as Gotama, 
were eventually enlisted to embellish the official 
commentary on the Dhammapada, whose minimalist 
quatrains were selected to enhance and intensify the 
Buddha’s programme.
The Dhammapada was a teaching tool and mnemonic 
handbook and moral primer and anthology of 
extracts capable at all points of re-inflation (as later 
commentators were only too happy to demonstrate). 
That is why folklore so early on accumulated around

299
HAROLD BEAVER
it. Especially around animal fables – even maxims with 
no discernible folk content. For example, typecasting 
monks in meditation by their postures: the monk 
dozing off (as a coiled snake); the monk doodling 
with his fingers on the ground (as an earthworm); the 
monk rocking a tree (as a monkey); the monk gazing 
abstractedly at the sky (as an astronomer). 35 Or the 
cautionary tale of Tissa, reborn as a louse ‘since he 
was so attached to his brand new set of robes’. 36 Or a 
millennially drawn-out feud between a housewife and 
her hen.37
These are all essentially comic interventions, and the 
verses themselves often suggest Aesop-like scenarios. 
But their lessons, for the most part, are profoundly 
troubling. Take the Spider:
‘All those who are slaves of desire 
Run into the stream of desires, 
Even as a spider runs in
to the web that it has just made.’38
Not only is it implied that our bonds are of our own 
making but that, like spiders, we are deluded into 
thinking them essential for our survival. For spiderlike, we are mean, selfish, solitary, predatory, vicious. 
We make ourselves at home in our lusts. We accept 
them as a perpetual source of vital nourishment. There 
we brood, lour, pounce ... Yet how flimsy that web of 
covetousness is, hung across the void, to which we run 
for shelter! All this, so discreetly evoked, is clumsily 
paraphrased by Buddhaghosa:

300
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Just as a spider, after spinning its web, sits motionless at 
the centre – scuttling off to kill a trapped fly, then sucking 
its juice, then resettling again at the centre – so creatures 
led by passion, depraved by hatred and maddened by 
anger, run along a stream of desire (taṇhā) of their own 
making, for which they’ll find no crossing.’
Jonathan Edwards summed up the image more 
tersely – albeit in Christian terms – by comparing our 
predicament to a spider hung by a thread over the 
abyss of eternal damnation.39
*  *  *
That spider, that crow, act on us in psychosomatic 
ways akin to Tarot cards, or emblems. A bestiary, as I 
suggested, could be compiled from the Dhammapada 
alone, consisting entirely of similar epigrams. 40 But I 
foraged further afield to gather the following twentyone items which invite woodcuts by Thomas Bewick, 
or miniatures by Mansur, or reliefs from Sanchi, to 
confirm their characteristic poses.41
*  *  *

301
HAROLD BEAVER
A FIVE-PART BESTIARY:
1. CRAVING ( TAN. HĀ )
The Crow (sign of the professional thief):
Watch him impudently flapping over a ploughed 
field and settling to pick over the furrows:
‘Life is easy for one who is shameless and bold as a crow, 
who aggressively slanders others while wantonly bragging 
himself.’
Caw! Caw! Caw! Our everyday world is a shameless 
rookery, loud with mutual bickering, where crafty selfassertion and wanton aggression rule the roost.
The Spider (sign of delusion):
‘All those who are slaves of desire run into the stream of 
desires, even as a spider runs in to the web that it has
just made.’
So beware of such homespun filaments!
The Dung Beetle (sign of accumulation):
‘Fatal is hunger for gain and fame ... It’s just like a beetle, 
feeding on dung, full of dung, gorged with dung, posing 
before a great dung-hill as if to say: “I’m a dung-eater, filled 
with dung, gorging on dung, the sole proprietor of this 
great dung-hill!”’42
A Jātaka tale tells of his comeuppance
‘A dung-beetle was attracted by the smell of dung to a 
deserted camp-site. Spotting spilt liquor on the ground, 
he sipped and sipped until he clambered up a dung-hill, 
tipsily chortling whenever the moist ground gave way:

302
THE BROKEN GONG
“Ha! The earth can’t support my weight!”
‘Just then an elephant in mus th approached, sniffed and 
again retreated. “That chap’s fleeing,” the dung-beetle 
concluded. “I’ll challenge him to battle.”
‘So he did. The elephant pricked his ears and looming over 
him trumpeted:
‘“I’ll kill you not with hoof, nor tusks, nor trunk; with dung 
I’ll kill; let filth be slain with filth.”
‘And dropping a massive turd on the beetle, he flushed his 
dead body away in a torrent of piss.’43
The Hare (sign of restlessness): 
Lust never runs in a straight line. It is the zigzag 
path of its flight – now dodging this way, now that – 
which evokes the image of the hare:
‘Steeped in lust all beings cower 
Terrified as the hare ensnared; 
Hobbled by fetters they incur 
Endlessly a repeated doom.’44
This loss of gambolling mirth reveals a terror-stricken 
conscience, caught in vicious circles of desire.
A Calf Tied to a Cow (sign of connubial bliss): 
But uxorious stay-at-homes are equally condemned:
‘Whoever would not lance the lust 
He feels for women will be bound 
In everlasting servitude, 
Like a milch-calf tethered to its dam.’45
A Hog Fed in its Sty (sign of slothfulness):
Just as all sluggards, wallowing in domestic ease, are 
condemned:

303
HAROLD BEAVER
‘A lazy glutton drowsy from 
Huge meals – rolling in his sleep like 
A hog in his sty – again and 
Again must re-enter the womb.’46
‘The vigilant exert themselves, delighting in no
fixed abode …’47
The Ox (sign of obtuseness): 
Nor does stolid stoicism prove a virtue. Dumb 
patience, by itself, remains dumb. The phlegmatic, far 
from persisting, merely resist:
‘A man who has learnt but little 
Grows old like an ox, his rūpa 
(Fleshiness) increases, but his 
Nāma (mentality) never.’48
As Ajahn Chah once remarked: ‘It’s about the same 
as the equanimity of a water buffalo!’ 49 Oxen expand 
only in bulk, that is, not in brain-power. Like Puṇṇa, 
the ‘ox-duty ascetic’, whose ox-mind developed by 
ox-behaviour ensured him a rebirth (at best) in ‘the 
company of oxen’.50
The Crane (sign of the wasted life):
Which is the Buddha’s drollest, yet most desolating, 
picture of morose old age:
‘Those who dissipated their youth, 
Without earning spiritual wealth, 
Drag out their lives like aged cranes 
Lingering round a fished-out pond.’51
All longing in that ecological wasteland – all ‘thirty-six 
streams of desire’ – long ago dried up.

304
THE BROKEN GONG
2. DISTRESS ( DUKKHA )
The Jackal (sign of unease): 
““Bhikkhus, have you heard that jackal howling at night 
towards dawn?” “Yes, Lord.” “That will be an old jackal 
afflicted by mange. Wherever he chooses to go, or stand, 
or sit, or lie, there the cold wind blows …”’52
In Ajahn Chah’s paraphrase: ‘Standing it suffered, 
running it suffered, sitting it suffered, lying down it 
suffered. Whilst in the underbrush, a tree-hollow or a 
cave, it suffered. It blamed standing for its discomfort, 
it blamed sitting, it blamed running and lying down; it 
blamed the tree, the underbrush and the cave. In fact, 
the problem was none of those things. That jackal had 
mange. The problem was with the mange.’53
The Leashed Dog (sign of masochism): 
‘Consider a dog, bhikkhus, tied with a leash to a strong 
stake. If he moves, he approaches that stake; if he stops, he 
stands next to that stake; if he sits, he squats by that stake; 
if he lies down, he settles close to that stake.’54
In his despair, the stake becomes his only refuge. 
His ‘dog-mind’, developed by ‘dog-behaviour’, enforces 
submission to the very source of his humiliation. Like 
the ‘naked dog-duty ascetic’ Seniya assured of rebirth 
(at best) in the abject ‘company of dogs’.55
But aren’t we all lashed to our bodies as to stakes? 
And, in distress, don’t most of us cling to those bodies, 
not the Dhamma, for refuge? By appropriating our sense

305
HAROLD BEAVER
of touch, our feelings, our discriminations, our mental 
faculties, our very consciousness, as constituents of 
an inalienable self, the Buddha argued, we merely 
reinforce our dog-like surrender to the prime source of 
our physical and emotional and mental ill-being.
The Cobra (sign of duplicity): 
Beware of the cobra. He is deadly dangerous. His 
head holds poisonous fangs; if you touch it, the cobra 
will bite straightaway. So steer clear of the head. But 
don’t think of picking him up by the tail either. Should 
you grab hold of the tail, in a flash his head will spin 
back and bite you.56
That split-second pause between grabbing the 
head or tail is all that distinguishes sukha from dukkha 
(‘happiness’ from ‘unhappiness’) in this life. For the two 
are linked, indivisible aspects of one whole. As Socrates, 
ruefully massaging his leg in prison, remarked:
‘What a queer thing it is, my friends, this sensation which 
is usually called “pleasure”! How inextricably linked to its 
antithesis “pain”! Yet they never put in a joint appearance. 
Only if you chase one and catch it, you’re almost bound to 
catch the other – like two bodies attached to the same head 
... Which is just what’s happening to me now. My leg throbbed 
from the fetter I was wearing, and now that it’s been removed, 
a gush of relief is flooding through it.’57
Traditionally viewed as guardians of sacred places 
– sliding between darkness and light, secrecy and 
revelation, earth and air, divinity and mankind – cobras 
(or nāgas in Sanskrit) should be offered a saucer of milk

306
THE BROKEN GONG
and left strictly undisturbed. 58 So watch out! As long 
as you don’t interfere with cobras, they’ll simply glide 
away. For all their venom, you won’t be affected. Just 
don’t go near them, or try to catch hold of them, and 
they won’t bite!
A Flock of Birds (sign of vulnerability): 
The images of darkness, imprisonment, death 
are always linked. Like a ‘crafty fowler’, death lurks 
everywhere, camouflaged by foliage, concealing 
himself in bushes and tall grasses:59
‘The world is indeed in darkness! 
Blinded, how few can peer within! 
Few as birds escaping a net 
Are those who escape to heaven.’60
Winged lightness, in itself, may not be enough; the 
world is trapped. Spiders spin webs out of themselves; 
but birds, like insects, fall into alien nets.
3. RESTRAINT ( SĪLA )
The Elephant (sign of endurance): 
Only the elephant has a whole chapter, or vagga, 
devoted to him. Just as his tracks could encompass 
those of every other land-bound creature, so could his 
character be requisitioned to evoke almost every aspect 
of self-awakening.61 For elephants’ minds (a mahout’s 
son declared), unlike men’s, were transparent:
‘Sir, I can drive an elephant to be trained and, in the 
time it takes to get from here to the Campā city-gate and

307
HAROLD BEAVER
back, every sign of fraud and duplicity, dishonesty and 
deception, will have shown up. As for men, their bodies 
play one role (be it slave, or messenger, or servant), while 
their minds and tongues enact quite another.’62
The method of training was this: first a forest 
elephant was roped to a royal elephant by the neck 
and force-marched to cleared land; then, fastened to a 
stake, was lovingly foddered and watered before being 
taught the six basic commands: ‘Forward!’, ‘Back!’, 
‘Kneel down!’, ‘Get up!’, ‘Take up!’, ‘Put down!’; finally, 
with a shield buckled to his trunk – eye to eye with 
his mahout threatening him with a lance – was poked 
and prodded with spears and swords and arrows, amid 
a hullabaloo of trumpets and kettledrums, until ‘he 
shifted neither his forehooves nor hindhooves, neither 
his front nor back, neither his head, nor ears, nor tusks, 
nor tail, nor trunk ...’63
An elephant’s prime characteristic was his 
determination:
‘Delight in watchfulness; guard well 
Your mind, lifting yourself up from 
Evil ways as an elephant 
Stuck in mud, floundering to rise.’64
Such vast exertions could be harnessed for battle, or 
for logging, or for shouldering the king’s howdah:
‘They lead trained elephants to war 
And kings ride throned on elephants. 
Best among men are self-trained men 
Who silently endure abuse.’65
‘Too many folk lack self-control,

308
THE BROKEN GONG
But I shall silently endure 
Abuse as battle-elephants
Endure shot arrows in their sides.’66
Yet, despite their thick hides, elephants (like us) 
remained visibly agitated by yearning and sexual 
arousal:
‘Mourning for his native forest 
Dhanapalaka, the tusker 
In pungent musth, chafing his chain, 
Refuses one mouthful of food.’67
Musth aside, though, they remained at all other 
times imperturbably self-contained:
‘If you can find no prudent friend 
To share your life, then live alone 
Like a king surrendering land 
Or bull-elephant in the wilds.’68
Elephants crossed the Buddha’s path from 
his conception to his death. His mother, Rani 
Sirimahāmayā, is said to have dreamt of an albino 
elephant before his birth. Bull-elephants had a habit 
of bursting in on him in the course of his meditations 
or alms-round. 69 The Mahāparinibbāna  Sutta wistfully 
compares his farewell gaze at Vēsalī, shortly before 
death, to ‘an elephant looking back’ since (the 
commentary explains) like an elephant he turned his 
whole body round.70 All in all, it could be said that the 
Buddha paradoxically combined two roles: that of bullelephant (beset by cow-elephants, calves and sucklings) 
and that of supreme mahout marshalling his forest 
bhikkhus into disciplined, rule-bound communities. 71

309
HAROLD BEAVER
The Racehorse (sign of awakening): 
‘As thoroughbreds from Sind …’;72 ‘As a thoroughbred 
touched by the whip ...’ 73 Is this the Buddha speaking 
from his youthful training as a Khattiya? Had he 
followed cavalry usage in laying on the whip, on an 
authorized graded scale, from flicking the hair, to 
touching the skin, to beating the flesh, to striking 
through to the bones?
‘Where on earth can be found a man 
So noble, so restrained by shame, 
Who starts from his sleep like a horse 
Flinching from the flick of the whip?’74
‘Watchful among the unwatchful, 
Wide awake among those who sleep, 
The wise man confronts life’s course like 
A racehorse outrunning a hack.’75
This is to be a thoroughbred – skittishly alert, 
nervously avoiding the whip; and such is the Buddha’s 
stable. Whether we realize it or not, a race is on.
4. CONCENTRATION ( SAMĀDHI )
The Monkey (sign of mutability): 
There is a legend of a monkey who came one day 
to offer the Buddha a bowl of wild honey. In his joy 
at having his offering accepted, he gambolled about 
so distractedly that he killed himself. As a reward, 
however, he was promptly reborn as a muni.
A ‘monkey-mind’ is the very antitype of the 
restrained and meditative mind. A ‘monkey-mind’

310
THE BROKEN GONG
is one without self-control, with only the briefest of 
attention spans:
‘Just as a monkey ranging through a forest seizes a branch 
and, letting that go, seizes another, in the same way, 
bhikkhus, of that which is called ‘mind’ , is called ‘thought’ , 
is called ‘consciousness’ , one moment arises as another 
ceases continually, both night and day.’76
A ‘monkey-mind’, therefore, can never escape the 
wheel of saṃsāra:
‘Like creeping-māluva, cravings 
Sprout in a heedless man. He leaps 
From birth to birth, like a monkey 
Seeking out fruit from tree to tree.’77
The Frog (sign of pretension):
Behold the bullfrogs sitting on pads of lotus leaves 
– remaining motionless for hours without once losing 
awareness of life around them! ‘Just as an owl on a 
branch, watching for voles, meditates ... just as a jackal 
on a river-bank, watching for fish, meditates ... just 
as a cat, watching for mice by some dustbin or drain, 
meditates ... just as an unladen donkey by its hitchingpost meditates …’78
A frog is the very pseudo-type of the restrained and 
meditative mind. ‘If by practising zazen one becomes a 
Buddha ...’ scribbled Master Sengai (1750-1837) beside 
his sketch of a ‘Meditating Frog’ – then all frogs are 
clearly Buddhas!79
The Tortoise (sign of restraint): 
‘Whoever withdraws his senses on all sides, as a

311
HAROLD BEAVER
tortoise draws in his limbs, is firmly established in 
wisdom.’80 Which are the exact terms in which the 
Buddha vindicated his own bhikkhus:
‘As a tortoise draws into his 
Shell each limb, so a monk withdraws 
Into his mind, all passion spent: 
Blameless, unblaming, unattached.’81
5. WISDOM ( PAÑÑĀ )
The Fish (sign of right effort): 
This marks the decisive shift – much as our 
emergence, at birth, from the watery sack of the womb 
to take our first choking lungful of air:
‘As a fish cast up on dry land 
From its liquid home, so the mind, 
Freed from sensuality, gasps 
To escape the clutch of Māra.’82
For those swirls of passions and ‘thirty-six streams 
of desire’ were our accustomed habitat outside of 
which, at first, we are bound to flounder and gasp.
The Bee (sign of the pure mind): 
Snakes may lurk in the grass but bees flit untroubled 
overhead, drawn to the scent of sandalwood and 
rosebay, orchid and jasmine:
‘Let a sage call on a village 
As a bee alights on flowers 
And makes off with due sustenance, 
Harming neither colour nor scent.’83
The bee settles and flies on, settles and flies. It never 
clings to a blossom. It never attaches itself like a snail.

312
THE BROKEN GONG
It picks up pollen and lets go. It picks up nectar and 
puts it down. It harms neither others nor itself. Drawn 
by its senses of odour and hue and taste, it appropriates 
a minimal essence which it alone can distinguish and 
isolate. That is sagacity.
The Swan (sign of transcendence):
‘The vigilant exert themselves, 
Delighting in no fixed abode 
As swans, abandoning a lake, 
Leave home after home in their wake.’84
Heaviest of birds, the swan is cumbersome, flapping 
energetically on take-off. Awkward on land, graceful 
on water, its strong and purposeful flight proves an 
unpredictable triumph:
‘Swans follow the path of the sun. 
Plunging powerfully through space – 
Conquering Māra and his host – 
The wise rise far above the world.’85
The Lion (sign of certainty): 
It was the lion’s unchallengeable roar that most 
affected the Buddha. It sounded for him the fearless 
trumpeting of truth – or rather, of the Four Noble 
Truths (Aryasacca ): the truth of suffering; the truth 
of the cause of suffering; the truth of the cessation of 
suffering; and the Noble Eightfold Path (atthangikamagga).
Yet the figure of the lion (sinha ), oddly enough, 
derived from Persian (Achaemenid) imagery. Rare on

313
HAROLD BEAVER
the Ganges, the lion became the Buddha’s personal 
trademark for everything from his teaching, called 
sīhanāda or ‘Lion’s Roar’, to his deathbed posture, 
posthumously compared to that of the ‘king of lions’. 86

9
The afterlife in Dante’s Divina Commedia is divided into 
three equal parts: first, a spiralling descent to a dead 
end (Inferno); followed by a spiralling, ever upward 
ascent (Purgatorio); and last, the airy flights of Paradiso. 
Purgatory at that time was still a fairly recent annex. 1 
Unknown before the end of the twelfth century – or if 
known, unnamed – its rapid colonization by medieval 
fantasy was mainly a product of the thirteenth century; 
and since the Divina Commedia opens in the Anno Santo 
of 1300, the poem’s elaborate tripart structure must 
have helped stabilize and guarantee that division for 
posterity.2
Yet there may also be something universal in the 
symbols involved. Jungian even, for those who prefer 
the collective unconscious. Not only in juxtaposition to 
the Buddhist afterworld – similarly divided into three 
parts of Sense-Desire (Kāma-loka ), of Form (Rūpa-loka)

315
HAROLD BEAVER
and Formlessness (Arūpa-loka), as finely gradated and 
enumerated from plane to plane as Dante’s – but in 
the contrast between a fateful (downward sloping) and 
benign (upward sloping) path. 3 For ‘in the heavens’, 
both the Buddha and Dante agreed, ‘there is no path ...’4
Both, too, had reached exactly thirty-five on 
confronting their mid-life crisis: Dante, as a character 
in his own poem, taken on a guided tour of the afterlife 
from cold to warmth, weight to weightlessness, 
darkness to light; the Buddha, setting out on a not 
dissimilar mission, with not dissimilar metaphors, 
but here and now to alarm and arouse the human 
condition. For our bodies, he insisted, were ephemeral 
as the ‘foam of a wave’, 5 or ‘withered gourds’ tossed 
out in the autumn; 6 in their very prime just ‘a mass of 
sores’, ‘a nest of diseases’, 7 each incessantly tortured 
by thirst and plagued by fever. 8 So it was only here 
and now (it followed) that we could indulge our sadomasochistic tantrums of lust; only here and now that 
we could purge ourselves of our infatuations; only from 
here and now that we could take flight for nibbāna:
‘Soon, soon, alas, this body here 
Will lie recumbent on the earth, 
Rejected, void of consciousness, 
And useless as a rotten log!’9
No dress-rehearsal was on offer. No resurrection of 
the physical body. No Last Judgment. Just this one-ina-million chance to avoid turning inadvertently back 
into a crow, or a spider, or a dung-beetle, or a hare, or 
a crane, or a jackal.

316
THE BROKEN GONG
Image-clusters, from the Dhammapada alone, suggest 
some vast, fragmented allegory of a kind that Dante 
(heir to an epic tradition) was to multiply within his 
own poetic structure.
The ultimate source of this structure was Plato’s 
Parable of the Cave: that twisting about from shackled 
dependence (on shadows) to the source of light, which 
was given its supreme Christian interpretation by 
Dante. But, millennia earlier, the whole burden of the 
Buddha’s teaching could also have been understood 
– and doubtless was understood – as an extended 
phenomenology of confinement (in suffering through 
craving), followed by a probation (of disciplined 
introspection), with a final bid for enlightenment
(or liberation).10
*  *  *
PART 1: INFERNO
The Bondage of Lust : Whose symbol is fire. ‘There is 
no fire like lust ...’ 11 Our bodies – unruly worlds within 
worlds – are ablaze:
‘Why so much laughter, why such joy,
When there’s nothing that’s not blazing ...’12
‘Bhikkhus, all things are blazing. And what is it 
that’s blazing? The eyes are blazing. Visible forms 
are blazing. Eye-consciousness is blazing. Eye-contact 
is blazing. Also feeling ... arising from eye-contact is

317
HAROLD BEAVER
blazing. Blazing with what? Blazing with the fires of 
lust, with the fires of hate, with the fires of delusion; 
they are blazing with birth, ageing and death, I say, 
with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
The ears are blazing. Sounds are blazing ... 
The nose is blazing. Odours are blazing ... 
The tongue is blazing. Flavours are blazing ... 
The body is blazing. Sense-data are blazing ...
The mind is blazing. Mind-consciousness is blazing. Mindcontact is blazing ...’13
And within that fiery furnace what did the Buddha’s 
ear detect? The same lugubrious clank caught by Blake in 
his peregrinations around eighteenth-century London:
‘In every cry of every Man,
In every Infant’s cry of fear, 
In every voice, in every ban, 
The mind-forged manacles I hear.’14
The mind-forged manacles of lust, and of anger, and 
of delusion! In Buddhist terms these are literally the 
ten shackles (saṃyojana ) which include pride, doubt, 
restlessness and belief in paths other than the Noble 
Eightfold Path: 15
‘The bond of iron, wood or hemp, 
Is not so strong – wise men have said – 
As lust’s attachment soldered to 
Sons or to wives, earrings or gems.’16
‘There is no fire like lust, no grip 
Like aversion’s, no equal to 
Delusion’s cage, no river with 
The untrammelled flux of craving.’

318
THE BROKEN GONG
For here there is also water with swirling currents, 17 
it turns out, bordered by couch grass and jungle 
creepers.18 As with Dante’s relay of seaborne images 
threading the Commedia, the Buddha’s metaphors fit 
both shipwrecks on headlong surges and landlocked 
incarcerations.19
*  *  *
PART 2: PURGATORIO
i. The Struggle for Self-Control: But fire is an ambivalent 
sign, capable of continuous shifts of meaning. Once 
on the Noble Eightfold Path, it may even swoop as a 
purging, purifying agent combusting those mindforged manacles into flames:
‘Those who delight in watchfulness, 
Contemptuous of thoughtlessness, 
Go forth as an advancing fire 
Consuming fetters great and small.’20
– a very different conflagration, then, ablaze with 
concentration and resolve. Dedication so fired was 
always viewed by the Buddha as a matter of professional 
skill akin to the task of acquiring a trade or craft. As the 
ex-dacoit Angulimāla was quick to recognize:
‘Irrigators guide the water, 
Fletchers straighten out the arrow, 
Joiners even out the timber,
Wise men seek to tame themselves.’21

319
HAROLD BEAVER
Reclaimed by the Buddha from the brutalities of 
manslaughter, that is, he had now slowly and surely to 
recondition himself. 
Just as an arrow-maker has to learn how to check for 
biased arrows, and a carpenter how to plane uneven 
timber, and a water-engineer how to channel floods 
down conduits, and a silversmith how to scum off 
molten silver, so every man and woman must learn how 
to discard stray promptings, how to straighten thought 
processes, how to control emotions and how to purify 
consciousness for himself alone and for herself alone;22 
or, put another way, the resolve to rein in and discipline 
the vagrant mind is exactly the same as that needed to 
train mules, rein in horses, or ride royal elephants. 23 
Good husbandry, the Buddha taught, begins not in the 
outhouse but within, just as good craftsmanship begins 
not in the workshop but in the mind.
The Buddha clearly enjoyed the company of 
coachmen and stable lads. As this dialogue in Sāvatthī 
suggests:
‘You too, Kesi, are a professional. Now how do you train a 
horse due for taming?’
‘For my part, your worship, I treat an untrained horse mildly 
at times, at other times harshly, and sometimes mildly and 
harshly turn and turn about ...’
‘But suppose, Kesi, some horse just doesn’t give in, then 
what do you do?’
‘In such cases, your worship, I destroy him. Why, you may 
ask? Simply not to discredit my teacher. But how does 
your worship train disciples? How can a man be tamed?’

320
THE BROKEN GONG
‘For my part, Kesi, I too train such a man mildly at times, 
at other times harshly, and sometimes mildly and harshly 
by turns.’
‘But supposing he just doesn’t comply?’
‘In such cases, Kesi, I destroy him.’
‘Destroy him? But surely the Exalted One doesn’t take life!’
‘True, but if an apprentice doesn’t submit to training 
whether treated mildly or harshly, or treated now mildly, 
now harshly, then neither the Tathāgata nor his fellows 
in the holy life think it worthwhile to admonish such
a man ...’24
For a horse-trainer, or mahout, had himself to be 
trained; and the essential ingredients for such training, 
as the Buddha pointed out to Prince Bodhi, consisted 
of good health, energy, understanding and genuine 
dedication. But, above all, faith.25 The apprentice had 
to have undeviating faith in his teacher, whatever 
his expertise: whether it was multiplication tables for 
accountants, exercises for thoroughbreds, or archery – 
or the Dhamma – for beginners.26 For the Dhamma, too, 
had its apprentices. It, too, provided instruction. It, too, 
required ‘skilful practice’. It, too, offered drills. It, too, 
supplied a training schedule of ‘progressive practices’ 
for its bhikkhus.
Today, in fact, this training might well be labelled a 
‘science’, an experimental therapy to be tested within 
the guidelines of a laboratory. Just as a merchant with 
a delicate tilt adjusts ‘a pair of scales’, that is, so a 
monk has to perfect his mental equilibrium. 27 Just as a 
goldsmith, after first washing, then melting, his grains, 
grips the gold with his tongs, now gently blowing on it,

321
HAROLD BEAVER
now sprinkling moisture on it, now closely scrutinizing 
it, so a monk (to achieve equal pliancy and gloss) has 
constantly to check and recheck the exact focus of 
his concentration (samādhi ), the exact degree of his 
persistence (viriya), the exact level of his equanimity 
(upekkhā).28
*  *  *
ii. On the Fine Art of Letting Go ( Paṭinissagga):29 This 
emphasis on acquiring a skill, for exercising a craft, 
suggests the preliminaries; but psychological expertise, 
in itself, can never suffice. It establishes a precondition 
merely for a further, essential stage: that of finally 
relinquishing the socialized identity, of no longer 
clutching at self-preservation, but simply ‘letting go’: 
‘just as the vasika jasmine/ sheds its withered flowers 
…’30 As if an eternal vacation – an utter emptiness – 
were the ultimate goal:
‘This boat, O bhikkhu, empty out!
When emptied, it will swiftly sail ...’31
Or, with another shift of scene:
‘When with a mind at peace, a monk 
Enters a solitude, he sees 
Deep into the penetrating 
Radiance of the Dhamma’s truth.’32
But this could hardly consist of a simple reflex, a mere 
sigh of relief. It requires unflinching determination, a 
ceaseless baling out of the bilge (of aberrant thought)

322
THE BROKEN GONG
from that ‘boat, O bhikkhu’ (of his mind). Only then 
could it lift against the current (of passion for the 
phenomenal world), reversing the inevitable glide 
downstream for the bracing tack (uddhaṃ-soto ) 
upstream.’33
*  *  *
iii. On the Travails of Attachment ( Upādāna):34 That 
bilge-water, among other things, added weight; and 
it was this insidious excess, so sloppily destabilizing, 
which the two subsequent parables illumine. Neither, 
as quoted here, is authentic exactly; though in each case 
the Buddha supplied the kernel or germ (preserved in 
the Saṁyutta Nikāya).
Let us call one ‘Who is King of the Castle?’ The 
Buddha must have been watching village children by a 
river or during the monsoon rains:
‘Just think of how little boys and girls play with mud-pies. 
As long as they’re busied with their pies – full of enthusiasm 
– amused and excited by them – so long they value and 
cherish them. But as soon as their attachment wanes – as 
soon as their pleasure sours – as soon as they’re no longer 
excited and delighted by them – then with both hands and 
feet they scatter those mud-pies, smash them and utterly 
demolish them – in short, stop playing with them.’35
Which, some seven centuries later, was fancifully 
revised into this far more dramatic Indian version:

323
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Some children were playing beside a river. They built 
sand-castles and each child defended his castle, shouting, 
“This one’s mine!” “This one’s mine!” Their castles were 
built well apart, leaving no scope for challenging whose 
was whose. But when all were completed, one boy kicked 
down another’s castle and utterly wrecked it. The furious 
proprietor pulled the boy’s hair, punched him in the nose 
and yelled: “He’s ruined my castle! Come, give me a hand! 
Let’s teach him a lesson!” The others promptly took his 
side. They thrashed the trespasser with sticks and trampled 
him into the sand. Then they went back to squatting in 
their castles, shouting, “This is mine! Keep out! You can’t 
have it! Don’t you dare touch it!” But shadows lengthened; 
it was growing dark and suddenly all realized it was high 
time to go home. Now no one cared what happened to 
their castles. One child stomped on hers; another shoved 
his over with both hands. Then they turned and hurried on 
their way, everyone to their own home.’36
This is no nursery tale. Our own vulgar refrains 
‘Look at Me! Me! Me!’ but ‘Keep off Mine! Mine! Mine!’ 
are equally paradoxical and childish. If anything, our 
egoism tends to grow ever more exorbitant, more 
pressing, until (as Thoreau put it) almost all are 
‘well-nigh crushed and smothered under [their] load, 
creeping down the road of life, pushing before [them] 
a barn seventy-five feet by forty ... and one hundred 
acres of land, tillage, mowing, pasture, and wood-lot!’37 
Or their equivalent in cash or kind.
The Buddha summed up this dung-beetle mindset in 
one octosyllabic quatrain:

324
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Bhārādānaṃ dukkhaṃ loke
Bhāranikkepanaṃ sukhaṃ
Nikhipitvā garum bhāram 
Aññam bhāraṃ anādiya.’38
‘Carrying weights is suffering; 
Tossing away burdens is bliss. 
The wise discard those weights, without 
Accumulating further weight.’
Which, some twenty-five centuries later, the Venerable 
Ajahn Chah in Thailand refashioned into this short 
parable. ‘The Caryatid’, we might call it, or ‘The 
Telamon’*:
‘It’s as if we were carrying a heavy rock. After a while we feel 
its weight but don’t know how to let go. So we stagger on. 
If advised of the benefits of dropping it, we say: “I can’t. I 
won’t have anything left!” All further discussion is useless; 
we just keep insisting: “If I drop it, I shall have nothing!” 
Until we’re so utterly weak and exhausted that finally we 
have no choice but to let go ...
What instant relief! What a surge of joy! How light-hearted 
we suddenly feel. At last, heart’s ease!’39
*  *  *
iv. On the Verge of Sīla (Self-Control): What Ajahn 
Chah did not add in this context was the unexpected 
* A ‘caryatid’ is a sculpted female figure that serves as a supportive 
column or pillar in a classically styled building; a ‘telamon’ is a sculpted 
male figure serving the same purpose. (Ed.)

325
HAROLD BEAVER
bonus to be gained from dislodging such excess weight; 
that by surrendering the rock it was the mind which 
would turn (potentially) rocklike: ‘Even as a great rock 
which is/ not shaken by the wind ...’; ‘a giant rock which 
neither wind/ nor Māra can o’erthrow ...’40
Far from lightweight then, the result – to the 
contrary – could be adamantine: like a city-pillar, say, 
or, in more grandiose architectural terms, a watchtower 
high in the Himalayas, or a frontier fortress that is well 
guarded.41 Absolute self-control would be impregnable. 
Or to turn to more pliant forms of repulsion: think 
of a lotus leaf from which moisture, briefly clinging, 
drips; or a mustard-seed dropping from the point of a 
needle.42 Or immerse yourself in the translucent depths 
of a lake: pure and peaceful and clear and deep – water, 
as usual, betokening boundless, fluid strength. 43
But at this point such a vision is still no more 
than a glimpse. As long as his ‘mindfulness’ remains 
rudimentary, ‘the wise man makes an insular/ retreat 
no flood can overflow.’ 44 Like the rhinoceros of the 
Khaggavisana Sutta, ‘anissito ca viharati ’ (he dwells 
independently) ‘na ca kiñci loke upādiyati’  (clinging to 
nothing in the world) – except his solitary, segregated, 
insulated self:
 ‘His self is refuge for himself. 
Where else indeed could refuge be?’45
That is the first shock to Western sensibility. Why 
this sudden withdrawal from the world? This moral 
isolation? Because affectionate feelings on their own,

326
THE BROKEN GONG
the Buddha taught, are bound to wobble. Altruism, by 
itself, does not grow rocklike. Good intentions, left to 
themselves, will collapse and crumble:
‘One’s own good one should never spurn for others’ good, 
however great.’46
Which comes as a second shock: that personal oneupmanship should be given such blatant advantage; 
that self-interest carries no stigma of narcissism or selfdelusion. But then, on second thoughts, why should 
it? King Pasenadi of Kosala once descended from the 
upper terrace of his palace at Sāvatthī, where he had 
been conversing with his wife, to report the following 
exchange to the Buddha:
KING PASENADI: ‘Mallikā, is there anyone dearer to you 
than yourself?’
QUEEN MALLIKĀ: ‘Your Majesty, there is no one dearer to 
me than myself. And you, sire, is anyone dearer to you than 
yourself?’
KING PASENADI: ‘No, Mallikā, no one is dearer to me than 
myself.’
The Buddha, far from reproving such unromantic 
sentiments, clearly found them exemplary, and uttered 
the following quatrain:
‘Though our thoughts range throughout the world, 
Dearer than self we’ll nothing find.
Since others, then, hold self so dear, 
Cherish yourself! But injure none!’47

327
HAROLD BEAVER
The Buddha, that is, positively encouraged such 
a mutual self-admiration society. For his injunction, 
‘Cherish yourself! But injure none!’ is merely a 
rhetorical inversion, it turns out, of the injunction by 
Leviticus (and Jesus), ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour 
as thyself.’48 Amour propre is revealed as the universal 
ground of altruism. While Jew or Christian, one might 
say, must first lose himself in order to find himself (in 
God), the Buddhist must first find himself in order, 
eventually, to lose himself (in nibbāna). Compassion, 
joy, equanimity – whether in the losing-as-finding or 
finding-as-losing – emerge in all higher religions as 
spontaneous, inexplicable common denominators.
That is a lesson supremely conveyed by the Parable 
of the Bamboo-Acrobats:
‘Once upon a time, a bamboo-acrobat set up his pole 
and called to his apprentice, “Come, my lad, jump on my 
shoulders and climb the pole”; and the apprentice did as 
he was bid.
Then the bamboo-acrobat told his apprentice: “Now, 
my lad, you look out for me and I’ll look out for you. By 
watching and protecting each other in that way, we shall 
show off our skill, earn a good fee and come down safe 
from the bamboo pole.”
But, perched aloft, the apprentice replied: “Master, it can’t 
be done like that. You look out for yourself, Master, and I’ll 
look out for myself. If we both watch and protect ourselves, 
then we’ll be able to show off our skill, earn a good fee and 
come down safe from the bamboo pole.”’49

328
THE BROKEN GONG
At this point, no doubt, the Buddha turned to his monks 
as if to ask which of the two was right; and a monk 
must have ventured the opinion: ‘The apprentice’. A 
calculated risk since he can hardly have missed the 
unprecedented cheek of an apprentice contradicting 
his Master. Especially when perched so airily overhead. 
In Asian cultures, to this day, apprentices do not correct 
or criticize their employers.
But the Buddha approved:
‘The Blessed One said: “That was the correct way of 
practice in this case. Just as the apprentice addressed his 
Master, thinking ‘I shall protect myself’ , you must practise 
satipaṭṭhāna; and when thinking ‘I shall protect others’ , you 
must also practise satipaṭṭhāna.50 Bhikkhus, in protecting 
oneself, one protects others; in protecting others, one 
protects oneself.”’
What the Buddha effectively encouraged by this 
parable, then, was an unfettered independence of 
mind: each man (boy, pupil, apprentice) not only acting 
for himself, but thinking for himself; each woman (girl, 
pupil, acolyte) not only acting for herself, but thinking 
for herself.
Yet the two positions really converge in the end 
until they amount to much the same thing. The key 
question, it seems, was rather: ‘Where do you begin?’ 
To which the Buddha unequivocally backed the answer 
‘with yourself’, as opposed to the Christian norm of 
universal altruism. Then he continued:

329
HAROLD BEAVER
‘And how does one, in protecting others, protect oneself? 
By forbearance, by non-violence, by possessing a heart of 
loving-kindness and compassion. In that way, by protecting 
others, one protects oneself.’
For really there was no such thing (in this world) 
as ‘unfettered independence’. It was rather a matter of 
quasi-dependent independence or quasi-independent 
dependence. Charles Darwin, in his Voyage of the 
Beagle, recorded: ‘Mr. Daniell has observed, in his 
meteorological essays, that a cloud sometimes appears 
fixed on a mountain summit, while the wind continues 
to blow over it.’ 51 A phenomenon also observed by the 
famous Zen master Tōzan, who explained it thus:
‘The blue mountain is the father of the white cloud. The 
white cloud is the son of the blue mountain. All day long 
they depend on each other, without being dependent on 
each other. The white cloud is always the white cloud. The 
blue mountain is always the blue mountain.’52
That conundrum was to be marvellously deployed 
by Dickens in Oliver Twist when Fagin inducts a new 
recruit into his gang of young thieves and pickpockets. 
There it constitutes a comic code, as it were, for criminal 
reciprocity; yet it retains the same uneasy equilibrium 
– for good or ill – dramatized by the Bamboo-Acrobats:
‘“In a little community like ours, my dear ... we have a 
general number one; that is, you can’t consider yourself as 
number one, without considering me too as the same, and

330
THE BROKEN GONG
all the other young people ... You see, we are so mixed up 
together, and identified in our interests, that it must be so. 
For instance, it’s your object to take care of number one – 
meaning yourself.”
“Certainly,” replied Mr. Bolter. “Yer about right there.”
“Well! You can’t take care of yourself, number one, without 
taking care of me, number one.”
“Number two, you mean,” said Mr. Bolter, who was largely 
endowed with the quality of selfishness.
“No, I don’t!” retorted Fagin. “I’m of the same importance 
to you, as you are to yourself ... To keep in the easy road, 
and keep [the gallows] at a distance, is object number one 
with you.”
“Of course, it is,” replied Mr. Bolter. “What do yer talk about 
such things for?”
“Only to show you my meaning clearly,” said the Jew, 
raising his eyebrows. “To be able to do that, you depend 
upon me. To keep my little business all snug, I depend 
upon you. The first is your number one, the second my 
number one. The more you value your number one, the 
more careful you must be of mine; so we come at last to 
what I told you at first – that a regard for number one holds 
us all together, and must do so, unless we would all go to 
pieces in company.”’53
*  *  *
v. The Self Surrendered : But that fortress-like 
independence, even as it is attained, must be 
simultaneously dismantled and demolished. The 
strength, paradoxically, is tried in the surrender:

331
HAROLD BEAVER
‘An Arahant is one who has removed the cross-bar, filled in 
the moat, shattered the pillar, unbolted the gates, lowered 
the flag, laid down the burden and broken the fetters.’54
An elaborate allegory of the mind promptly decoded 
point-counterpoint:
‘And how is he one who has removed the cross-bar? By 
abandoning ignorance ... 
And how is he one who has filled in the moat? By 
abandoning the cycle of rebirths ...
And how has he shattered the pillar? By abandoning 
craving ... 
And how has he unbolted the gates? By abandoning the 
five lower fetters ... 
And how has he lowered the flag, laid down the burden 
and broken the fetters? By abandoning the conceit
of self ...’
The embattled Dhamma was thus proclaimed as one 
of unconditional surrender.
*  *  *
vi. The Self Questioned : But what exactly was 
surrendered, unbolted and demolished here? And 
where exactly? The very act turned out to be a 
dismantling of a phantasm or illusion:
‘Poṭṭhapāda, it’s just as if someone were to build a ladder 
and carry it to a crossroads, saying he meant to climb a 
mansion wall. But when people asked: “What mansion do 
you mean? Where is it exactly? And your scaling-ladder – is 
it for an east-facing wall, or west-, or north- , or south-facing

332
THE BROKEN GONG
wall? Are its turrets tall? Or of low or middling height?” He’d 
shrug, “I’ve no idea.” “So you’ve never seen this mansion 
then?” they’d press him. “You don’t know what kind of wall 
it is you intend to scale?” “Haven’t a clue,” he’d reply. Now, 
Poṭṭhapāda, can you make head or tail of that? It’s just the 
same with those ascetics and Brahmans who insist they 
survive happily after death.’55
As if there really were such a ‘thing’ as an immortal and 
self-contained ‘self’ in the first place!
*  *  *
PART 3: FROM PURGATORIO TO 
PARADISO
i. Illusion Discarded:
‘Poṭṭhapāda, suppose these ascetics and Brahmans were 
to challenge me: “You preach the elimination of self, yet 
you argue – if we’ve understood you aright – that there is no 
self. So what ‘self’ exactly do you have in mind?” To which I 
would reply: “Whether it’s this, that or the other self doesn’t 
concern me, but whatever self you privately conceive and 
cleave to, that’s the one that needs eradicating – for your 
own good!”
It’s just like a man building a ladder, and carrying it to 
the foot of a mansion and propping it up against the 
foundations. Should someone ask: “Which wall exactly 
are you thinking of scaling? Does it face east, or west, or 
north, or south? Is the mansion tall? Or low, or of middling 
height?” He’d answer: “Why, it’s this very house, of course, 
at the foot of whose walls I’ve propped my ladder!”’56

333
HAROLD BEAVER
*  *  *
ii. Ascending the ladder: Paṭinissagga, then, implies not 
only abandoning possessions and eliminating stains 
(kilesas), but eradicating this pervasive but illusory 
sense of self.  57  The metaphors are all of lightness 
and whiteness and brightness and transparency and
aerial ascent.
Their essential buoyancy is fuelled by a paradox. ‘To 
study the Buddha Way is to study oneself’, wrote Dōgen; 
‘to study the self is to forget the self.’ 58 Somehow we 
need to utilize the self without exactly clinging to the 
self – the secret being to hold on, as one holds on to a 
ladder, and mounts step by step:
‘Having passed a particular step, one does not hold on to 
that rung and try to carry it with one. One simply goes up 
until one reaches the room at the top where one wants to 
go. Then one leaves the ladder behind without trying to 
cling to it.’59
In the words of a Tibetan proverb: ‘Remember where 
you’re climbing to, and don’t just stick to the ladder.’ 
Or as Wittgenstein far more recently put it:
‘My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who 
understands me finally recognizes them as senseless, 
when he has climbed out through them, on them, over 
them. (He must, so to speak, throw away the ladder, 
after he has climbed up on it.) He must surmount these 
propositions; then he sees the world aright.’60

334
THE BROKEN GONG
Bamboo gymnastics naturally continued to attract 
attention in this symbolic arena. The Buddha himself, it 
is said, addressed the following quatrain to an acrobat 
poised on top of his pole:
‘Let go contingency – Time Past, 
And Future Time, and Present Time – 
Until, with mind released, through birth – 
Decay you’ll never circle more.’61
Which Ch’ang-sha Ching-ts’en, with Chinese bravura, 
translated into:
‘You who sit on top of a hundred-foot pole, 
Although you have entered the way, it is not yet authentic. 
Take a step from the top of the pole
And display your whole body in ten directions.’62
Which Japanese Dōgen, in his turn, condensed into 
a single plunge: ‘So you’ve climbed to the top of a 
hundred-foot pole. Now keep on going.’63
*  *  *
PART 4: PARADISO
i. Liberation: However hard and wearisome the 
ascent, this turns out to be nothing short of a miracle:
‘Even as on a rubbish tip
Beside the highway, a lotus 
Blossoming with its pure fragrance 
Beguiles and enraptures the mind.’64

335
HAROLD BEAVER
The images of liberation are few – ultimately 
merging (as in Dante) into a single source: the 
radiance of sunlight, moonlight, starlight. All those 
heedless once but now living heedfully, all those (like 
Angulimāla) overcoming the evil they have done with 
good, or devoting themselves (like a young bhikkhu) to 
the Buddha’s teaching,65
‘shed a light over the world like
that of the moon when freed from clouds.’
All noble ones
‘are pure and bright, clear and serene,’67
even as the moon follows ‘the star’s path,’68
‘The sun is bright by day, the moon 
Illumines the night. The warrior 
Glows in his armour; the Brahman, 
In contemplation. But all day 
Long and all night long, resplendent 
Without respite, shines the Buddha.’69
But unlike the moon’s path travelling across ‘the 
star’s path’, which can be plotted by astrologers, the 
paths of the enlightened are pathless – apadam – beyond 
detection of the enquiring intellect:
‘Their paths are as impossible 
To trace as that of birds through space ...’70
‘What track can there be to trace those 
Who are trackless, without craving ...?’71

336
THE BROKEN GONG
Like a flight of swans with whirring wings, they 
miraculously lift off from their native haunts 72 to 
‘follow the path of the sun’.73
But such airy ascents are paralleled, as already 
observed, by river-traffic below: of ‘stream-winners’ 
battling – uddhaṃ-soto – against the current (of 
worldliness), and ‘ford-finders’ crossing the turbulent 
rapids (of life) to gain ‘the other side’. 74 A supreme 
instance of such a crossing is related in the Parable of 
the Raft.75
*  *  *
ii. The Dhamma 1: ‘Monks, I shall teach you the 
Dhamma. I shall show you, monks, how the Dhamma 
resembles a raft designed for a particular practical 
purpose, not for retention as an unwieldy keepsake. * 
Listen and heed well what I have to say.’
‘Suppose, monks, a traveller is confronted by a vast 
expanse of water whose near shore poses the most fearful 
danger, but whose far shore seems relatively secure and 
free from harm. With neither bridge nor ferry in sight, 
however, he decides on reflection to gather what reeds and 
sticks, branches and foliage, he may and tie them together 
into a raft. Afloat on that raft, he contrives to paddle, using 
both hands and feet, safely to the other side.
* Beaver has extended the description of the raft from the more 
accurate ‘being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose 
of grasping.’ (Ed.)

337
HAROLD BEAVER
Once across, though, he is caught in a bind. “That raft has 
really been useful to me,” he reflects, “since it gave me safe 
passage to this side. Perhaps I should now keep the raft, 
hoisting it on to my head or shouldering it as I continue 
on my way?” What do you think, monks, would that have 
been the right thing to do?’ 
‘No, Lord.’
‘What then should he do? The raft had certainly been useful, 
enabling him to make safe passage to the other side. What 
if he now hauled it up on dry land and beached it there? 
Or perhaps simply let it sink off-shore and continue as he 
pleased?’
The moral was loud and clear:
‘In either case, monks – whether by beaching or sinking 
the raft – the traveller would have done exactly as he 
should have done.’
 Such was the Buddha’s demonstration of how the 
Dhamma resembled a raft; and ‘whoever grasps the 
meaning of this parable,’ he concluded, ‘should learn 
to surrender even the highest teachings, let alone 
contemptible low ones!’76 The Dhamma, in other words, 
may be essential for salvation; but once salvation is 
attained, it simultaneously loses its value – without, 
of course, shedding an iota of its inherent truth. 77 The 
final act of paṭinissagga relinquishes not only ‘I’ and 
‘mine’ back to nature – to Dhamma – but abandons, in 
the end, even unconditioned truth (as a concept) itself.
*  *  *

338
THE BROKEN GONG
iii. The Dhamma 2: But there are other, less isolated 
crossings. Elsewhere the Buddha appears as a Magadhan 
herdsman on the banks of the Ganges, expert in driving 
his cattle across a ford so that the whole herd of bulls, 
cows, heifers, young oxen and calves cross safely to the 
far side: that is, all of mankind, whatever their spiritual 
attainments, who are ‘mature in the Dhamma’ and 
have placed their faith in him.78
Even here miracles may irrupt, as in the Ganges 
crossing touched on in the last chapter, when the river 
was so brimful that even a crow could drink out of it:
‘People, eager to cross from shore to shore, were bustling 
around for boats. Or log rafts. Or starting to lash reed-floats 
together. Then, as swiftly as a strong man can flex his 
extended arm or again unflex it, the Blessed One vanished 
from the near bank of the Ganges and reappeared with his 
Sangha of bhikkhus on the far shore.
Looking back at the crowd still hunting for boats or building 
rafts, the Buddha exclaimed:
“While some have crossed the flooded stream 
By samādhi’s suspension bridge,
Others still tinker with their rafts. 
The wise already have moved on.”’79
As elsewhere in the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta, miracle is 
turned to parable, or parable reinterpreted as miracle. 
But a final truth emerges: not only were rafts to be 
ultimately abandoned, but for the Buddha’s closest 
disciples – by his personal intervention – no homemade raft had ever been necessary in the first place.

339
HAROLD BEAVER
Miraculous winged progress was possible without any 
clumsily patched and improvised, haphazard, Do-ItYourself contrivance.

10
After examining so many truncated texts, it is time to 
present a complete, (substantially) unabridged sutta. 
The choice was huge, but I wanted one which supplied 
a reasonably full account of the Buddha’s teaching, 
in as dramatic a setting as possible, restoring at least 
some incidents, images or vignettes, quoted earlier, to 
their original setting.
My choice fell on the Sāmaññaphala Sutta ( Dīgha 
Nikāya 2), the source of numerous passages already 
discussed. The teaching, too, covers a wide range from 
sammā kammanta (right conduct) and sammā sati (right 
attentiveness) to the four jhānas (absorptions) and 
eventual full realization of the Four Noble Truths. But 
it was the dramatic irony, the uncanny chiaroscuro, 
pervading this confrontation between the young 
king of Magadha and the Buddha, that most attracted 
me. The whole scene – with lamps flickering, torches

341
HAROLD BEAVER
flaring – trembles with an inner tension. As if in the 
moon’s reflected sheen, the Buddha was well aware 
that King Ajātasattu was well aware that the Buddha 
was well aware what had led him to pay this one and 
only surprise visit: it being no state secret that he 
had had his kindly old father, King Seniya Bimbisāra, 
assassinated; or rather, thrown into prison, after his 
voluntary abdication, and wantonly starved to death.1
The late King, his brother-in-law King Pasenadi 
of Kosala and the Buddha all belonged to the same 
generation, born some time in the c. 560s BCE.2 So King 
Bimbisāra would have been at least seventy when he 
died in c. 491; the Buddha, at the time of this interview, 
well over seventy. An elderly man, that is, he was 
courteously receiving a regicide and usurper with his 
father’s blood still fresh on his hands. Not only that, 
but his venerable father had been a particularly devout 
supporter of the Sangha, having long ago granted 
the Buddha a bamboo-grove near the palace for his 
retreats. It was there, in Rājagaha, that the Buddha 
passed most of the last twenty years of his life. From 
there, he set off on his final journey. By the time of his 
death, some eighteen large Buddhist monasteries, it is 
said, flourished in Rājagaha.
Buddhism must have permeated the whole court; 
this very ‘summit’ took place in a mango-grove 
belonging to the royal physician. 3 The wary parricide 
was clearly scared out of his wits. For months he had 
been visiting and quizzing every celebrated sophist in 
the kingdom to put off this crucial encounter with his

342
THE BROKEN GONG
father’s favourite. Even now, as he marched off into the 
night with his bizarre retinue of five hundred wives 
on the backs of five hundred elephants, flanked by 
torch-bearers, this Machiavellian suspected a trap. The 
silvery moonlight – the very silence – unnerved him. 
Oddly, it seems that the young Ajātasattu Vedehiputta 
had never been introduced by his father to the Buddha. 
Or perhaps, in his agitation, he just failed to recognize 
him at night in that sea of saffron. As he stood, selfconsciously ill at ease, in the lamplight to one side of 
the seated Buddha, his restless thoughts promptly 
dodged to his own ever-restless son, the Crown
Prince Udāyabhadda.
Further ironies resound here. The royal house of 
Magadha – precursor of the Mauryan Empire – for all its 
eventual glory was to be as cursed from one generation 
to the next as the house of Atreus. Just as Ajātasattu 
had murdered his father, so Prince Udāyabhadda (some 
thirty-two years later) was to murder his father, only 
to be assassinated in his turn by his son. The Buddha 
must have foreseen this treacherous succession even 
as he graciously received the present usurper. The 
foreknowledge clinched his solemn verdict: ‘The King 
is done for; his fate is sealed!’ There was no refuge for 
parricides. Their kamma was ineluctable. Such outrages 
entailed instantaneous consequences in the
world to come.
No wonder, then, that the King, for all his retinue, 
was terrified. Racked by guilt, worn out by insomnia, 
plagued by goose-flesh, he could hardly afford, at this

343
HAROLD BEAVER
solemn hour, to fall back on displays of petulance or 
insolence.4 Yet nothing was openly hinted on either 
side throughout the initial exchange and long midnight 
oration, until Ajātasattu at last blurted out:
‘Transgression overcame me, Lord – foolish, erring and 
wicked as I was. For the sake of the throne I deprived my 
father – that good man and just king – of his life.’5
As soon as this confession was made and publicly 
condoned, however, he disappeared into the night with 
some flimsy excuse (‘I am busy and have much to do’), 
only too obviously relieved to be let off the hook.
That is how royalty and mendicants, it seems, 
interacted: in a power play constrained within a code of 
mutual respect. For the sutta is also a study of political 
control in a spiritual context as well as of spiritual 
control in a political context. Whatever Ajātasattu 
actually felt, for example, about the amoral counsel 
offered by Pūraṇa Kassapa (which clearly suited his 
Machiavellian designs), he was so overawed by these 
wanderers and so overburdened by his conscience that 
he could only dismiss Pūraṇa’s exposition, in retrospect, 
with a colloquial quip: ‘just as if he’d been asked about a 
mango-tree and described a breadfruit, or, being asked 
about a breadfruit-tree, described a mango’. Yet with 
each of his six interlocutors – though suspicious of 
being fooled – he had repressed his usual propensity to 
sneer and snub. For at heart he knew all too well that 
he was only fooling himself by thus obstinately evading 
the decisive rendez-vous.

344
THE BROKEN GONG
The Buddha, in his way, was equally devious, 
never alluding to his benefactor’s imprisonment (in 
tantalizing sight of the palace) or excruciating death. 
What was suppressed, however, slily resurfaced in the 
provocative fictions first put into a domestic slave’s 
(or labourer’s) mouth, then again into a tax-paying 
farmer’s (vessa’s) mouth:
‘Here’s King Ajātasattu of Magadha who is a man; and I, too, 
am a man. The King is addicted to all five sense-pleasures, 
just like a god, while I’m a mere ...’
Voicing such egalitarian sentiments was the 
Buddha’s initial move to undermine not only the 
hierarchical apex of the monarchy, which de facto 
perpetuated the caste system, but also the snobbish 
and patronizing views of that system which never 
deigned even to mention (as beneath courtly and 
military contempt) such essential occupations as that 
of a domestic, or a farmer, or an estate-steward.6 Those 
opening parables, then, concealed a hidden agenda. As 
in all his encounters – with merchants, or Brahman 
students, or village headmen – the Buddha was always 
scrupulously, if surreptitiously, engaged as protagonist 
in testing and amplifying the dialectic frame. His 
teaching, though often repetitive, was always customtailored to his antagonist.
The title has been translated as ‘The Fruits of 
the Homeless Life’. 7 But, characteristically, it is not 
primarily delivered for the bhikkhus’ benefit at all 
(though a huge crowd of 1,250 monks was present), 
but that of this proud, preoccupied monarch who not

345
HAROLD BEAVER
only claimed to be too busy to linger in the moonlight, 
but disdained even inviting the Buddha’s Sangha, as 
custom required, to share a meal at some future date 
with him in the palace grounds. Far from contrite, he 
went immediately to war, overrunning Vesālī, northeast of the Ganges, capital of the Vajjian Confederacy. 8 
Meanwhile, his cousin, Prince Viḍūḍabha, after his own 
successful coup (deserting his father, King Pasenadi of 
Kosala, on Sakyan territory), overran the Sakyās and 
Koliyās. Then, predictably, the two cousins collapsed, 
like mirror-images, on each other.
*  *  *
THE SĀMAÑÑAPHALA SUTTA: 9
Thus have I heard. Once, at the end of the rainy 
season, the Lord was staying at Rājagaha, in a mangogrove belonging to Jīvaka, the adopted son of Prince 
Abhaya, with a large assembly of some twelve hundred 
and fifty monks. On the fast-day called Komudi 
(after the white water-lily which blooms then), King 
Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha climbed up on 
to the roof of his palace to recline in the light of the 
full moon, surrounded by his ministers. 10 ‘How lovely 
this moonlit night is!’ he solemnly exclaimed. ‘How 
remarkable to behold the white lilies blooming by the 
light of the moon! How auspicious such a moonlit night 
must be, my friends! Could we not attend on some 
ascetic or Brahman to help calm our troubled mind?’

346
THE BROKEN GONG
‘What about Pūraṇa Kassapa, Sire?’ a minister 
proposed. ‘He teaches his own disciples, surrounded by 
supporters, and is universally acclaimed as the founder 
of a philosophical school. Virtuous and venerable, 
moreover, he has spent long years as an ascetic. Let 
Your Majesty visit this Pūraṇa Kassapa. If anyone, he 
should be able to calm Your Majesty’s mind.’ But King 
Ajātasattu did not deign to reply. 
Another minister spoke, suggesting Makkhali 
Gosāla; another, suggesting Ajita Kesakambalī; another, 
suggesting Pakudha Kaccāyana; another, suggesting 
Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta; another, suggesting Nigaṇṭha 
Nāṭaputta – all popular teachers with widespread 
reputations as founders of philosophical schools. But 
King Ajātasattu remained sunk in silence.
Then, turning to Jīvaka seated at his side, he 
asked: ‘My friend, why do you alone hold back?’ ‘Sire’, 
Jīvaka replied, ‘the Exalted One, the Arahant, the 
Fully Self-Enlightened One is at this moment staying 
in my mango-grove with a large company of some 
twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus. The fame of the 
Blessed Gotama has spread far and wide as one who 
has penetrated the Dhamma by his own determined 
insight; is endowed with supreme wisdom; practises 
perfect morality; speaks only what is beneficial; knows 
the animate and inanimate and conditioned worlds; 
trains all who deserve to be trained; is teacher of devas 
and men as a unique, incomparable Buddha. Let Your 
Majesty attend on the Lord Buddha. He will surely 
pacify Your Majesty’s mind.’

347
HAROLD BEAVER
‘If that be so, Jīvaka, have the riding-elephants
made ready.’
‘Very good, Sire’, Jīvaka nodded, rapidly descending 
from the upper terrace to order five hundred cowelephants caparisoned as well as the imperial tusker; 
later reporting back: ‘The riding-elephants are waiting, 
Sire. You may proceed at your leisure.’
Having placed his five hundred wives, each on her 
own cow-elephant, King Ajātasattu rode the state 
elephant, in a royal progress, escorted by torch-bearers 
from Rājagaha to Jīvaka’s mango-grove.
On approaching the grove, however, the King 
became so fraught and jittery that his hair stood up on 
end. ‘Friend Jīvaka,’ he murmured in consternation, 
‘you’re not deceiving me, I trust? You’re not playing 
me some trick? You’re not delivering me into the 
hands of an enemy? How is it that from these twelve 
hundred and fifty bhikkhus not a sneeze, not a cough, 
not a whisper can be heard?’
‘Trust me, Sire! There’s no need for alarm. I 
wouldn’t dream of deceiving you, nor of tricking you, 
nor of delivering you into the hands of an enemy. Just 
proceed, Sire, proceed! Look, lights are burning in the 
round pavilion!’
King Ajātasattu, having ridden his elephant as far 
as the ground permitted, dismounted, continuing on 
foot to the door of the round pavilion. ‘But where is 
the Lord, Jīvaka?’ He suddenly stopped. ‘That, Sire, is 
the Lord,’ Jīvaka indicated. ‘The One sitting with his 
back to the middle pillar, facing east, with his order of 
bhikkhus before him.’

348
THE BROKEN GONG
Thereupon the King went up to the Lord and standing 
to one side, observed how the assembled bhikkhus were 
gathered calm and silent as a clear lake.‘If only my son, 
Prince Udāyabhadda,’ he exclaimed, ‘were possessed of 
such calm as this order of monks!’
‘So your thoughts turn to the one you love, Your 
Majesty’, broke in the Blessed One.
‘True, Venerable Sir, I love the young prince dearly. 
If only he were possessed of such calm as this order 
of monks!’ Having made obeisance to the Lord and 
saluted the order of monks with joined palms raised, 
King Ajātasattu sat down to one side, saying: ‘I have a 
question for you, Venerable Sir, if Your Honour would 
deign to answer me.’
‘Please, proceed. Let Your Majesty ask whatever
he wishes.’
‘Venerable Sir, there are men of various callings. 
And what are they? They are mahouts, cavalrymen, 
charioteers, archers, standard-bearers, adjutants, 
commandos and seven other grades of military 
personnel, secretaries, cooks, barbers, bath-attendants, 
confectioners, garland-makers, dhobi-men, weavers, 
basket-makers, potters, clerks and accountants, etc. 
etc. Now what can be the point of renunciation and 
joining a sect like yours? Ordinary folk, by mastering 
ordinary crafts, get something out of them. They 
can make themselves comfortable in the world and 
maintain their families and friends in comfort too. 
Let alone wanderers and Brahmans whose upkeep 
ensures admission into the supramundane, heavenly

349
HAROLD BEAVER
realms. Can you, Venerable Sir, indicate any such clear 
advantage in this world for the life of a recluse?’
‘Your Majesty, do you recall ever putting such a 
question to ascetics and Brahmans?’
‘Yes, Sir. I do.’
‘If it’s of no inconvenience to Your Majesty, could 
you briefly sketch their replies?’
‘For the likes of you, Sir, no trouble at all.’ 
‘In that case speak, Your Majesty.’
‘One time, Sir, I visited Pūraṇa Kassapa, and – after 
exchanging greetings and sitting to one side – asked 
him to indicate one clear advantage in this world 
for the life of a recluse. 11 He replied, in effect, that 
whoever mutilated others (or was responsible for 
their mutilation), or burned others (or was responsible 
for their death by burning), or tormented others (or 
was responsible for their torment), or oppressed, 
threatened, lied, killed, stole, plundered, committed 
adultery or highway robbery, could not be considered a 
criminal. Even should he mince everyone on this earth 
with a circular saw into steak tartare, no evil would 
result. Consider the opposing shores of the Ganges: 
neither on the south bank would such a massacre, 
such mayhem, accumulate evil, nor on the north bank 
would alms-giving, temple offerings, abstinence, strict 
adherence to truthfulness and self-control accumulate 
merit. That, Sir, was how Pūraṇa Kassapa explained 
“non-causative action” (akiriya ) to me. It was just as 
if someone, asked about a mango-tree, had described 
a breadfruit; or, asked about a breadfruit-tree, had

350
THE BROKEN GONG
described a mango. But, I thought, why malign any 
Brahman or ascetic living in my kingdom? So, despite 
feeling irked, I neither applauded nor rebutted the 
exposition but, without a sign of pleasure or displeasure, 
simply rose and departed.
Another time, I visited Makkhali Gosāla and asked 
him the same question.12 He replied, in effect, that there 
was no root cause for either defilement or purification, 
there being no such lever as human initiative. 
All animate objects were passive, powerless, predetermined on a complex calculus of 1,406,600 types of 
birth, within 8,400,000 time cycles, each with sixty-two 
intermediary aeons, constituting 4,900 different modes 
of living and 4,900 kinds of wandering ascetics ... All 
happiness and misery, therefore, was predestined along 
one of sixty-two paths, by six classes of humankind, 
seven classes of rebirth (as conscious beings), eight 
stages of human progress and two thousand sentient 
existences. Exactly as a ball of string, when thrown, will 
fly only as far as the length of string unravels, so both 
fools and the wise cycle from one existence to another 
until they make an end of suffering. That, Sir, was how 
Makkhali Gosāla explained “purification by the round 
of suffering” (saṃsāra suddhi) to me. Again, recalling the 
mango- and breadfruit-trees, I neither applauded nor 
rebutted his exposition but, without a sign of pleasure 
or displeasure, simply rose and departed.
On a third occasion, I visited Ajita Kesakambalī 
and yet again put my question. 13 He argued, in effect, 
that there was no such thing (on either the physical

351
HAROLD BEAVER
or mental plane) as spontaneous conception in this 
world, since we are composed of nothing but the four 
great elements: the earthy part, on death, reverting 
to earth, the watery part to water, the fiery part to 
fire, the airy part to air and our faculties melting into 
space. The pallbearers’ footfall can be heard as far as 
the cemetery. All alms-giving ends in ashes; the bare 
bones lie greying like pigeons. Since all is matter, and 
matter decomposes, nothing survives. Both fools and 
the wise are destroyed and utterly perish. That, Sir, 
was how Ajita Kesakambalī explained the doctrine of 
materialism (or annihilation) to me; and again, without 
either applauding or rebutting his exposition, I simply 
rose and left without a word. 
On the fourth occasion, I visited Pakudha Kaccāyana 
and yet again put my question. He answered, in 
effect, that there were seven things in all unshaken 
as mountain-tops and firm as columns. They were 
the earth-body, the water-body, the fire-body and the 
air-body, together with pleasure and pain and an élan 
vital (jīva, or life-principle). It follows that there can be 
neither killer nor killed, neither speaker nor listener, 
neither student nor teacher since chopping off a head 
with a sword is not so much depriving someone of life 
as inserting a blade into the intercalary space between 
these seven bodies. Again, I neither applauded nor 
rebutted his exposition, but simply rose and left 
without a word.
On the fifth occasion, I visited Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta 
and yet again put my question.14 He answered, in effect,

352
THE BROKEN GONG
that a Nigaṇṭha was restrained by a fourfold restraint: 
abstention from water; abstention from sin; abstention 
from sex; and abstention from all restraint. Again, 
neither applauding nor rebutting his exposition, I 
simply rose and left without a word.
Lastly, I visited Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta and yet 
again put my question. He answered, in effect, by 
catechizing an extended variant of the ten dilemmas, 
or “undeclared points” (avyākatāni ).15 For example: Is 
there another world? Or isn’t there another world? Or 
both? Or neither? Is there life after death? Or isn’t there 
life after death? Or both? Or neither? Do good or bad 
deeds (kamma) entail consequences after death? Or no 
consequences? Or both? Or neither? That, Sir, was how 
Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta shilly-shallied and prevaricated, 
saying: “If I thought so, I would say so. But I don’t think 
so and don’t say so. Nor do I say it’s otherwise. Since I 
don’t say it’s not so. And I don’t say it’s not not so.” Well, 
of all these ascetics and Brahmans, I thought Sañjaya 
Belaṭṭhiputta was the most muddle-headed and stupid. 
Without either applauding or scorning his exposition, 
therefore, I simply rose and left without a word.
So now, Venerable Sir, I put it to you. There are men 
of various callings who make themselves comfortable 
in the world while maintaining their families and 
friends. What clear advantages, then, do you claim for 
those joining your sect? Can you point to a palpable 
reward here and now for the life of a recluse?’
‘Your Majesty, I can. But first I must put to you a 
few questions in return. Answer, Sire, as you see fit.

353
HAROLD BEAVER
What do you think? Imagine you had a domestic in 
your household who each morning got up earlier than 
you and each evening retired later than you – always 
affable, always quick-witted, always on his toes. “How 
strange,” he might think, “how extraordinary are the 
fruits of merit! Here’s King Ajātasattu of Magadha who 
is a man; and I too am a man. The King is addicted to 
all five sense-pleasures, just like a god, while I’m a 
mere domestic, always on the alert, always on the go. 
Perhaps I too could have been a King like him. Suppose 
I earned myself some merit. Suppose I shaved off my 
hair and beard, donned saffron robes and renounced 
hearth and home for the homeless life.” So deserting 
his family and abandoning his property, he shaved 
hair and beard, donned saffron robes and went forth
into homelessness.
As a recluse – further imagine – he persistently 
restrained his body, speech and thought, delighting 
in solitude, content with the minimum of food and 
clothing. Then one day it’s announced: “Your Majesty, 
do you recall that domestic who attended on you – 
the one who shaved off his hair and went forth into 
homelessness? He now lives the holy life, perfecting his 
mindfulness and morality.” What would your response 
be? “Tell him to return here at once and start waiting 
on me as before!”?’
‘Of course not, Venerable Sir. We should pay him due 
respect, warmly welcome him, even bid him receive 
robes, food, shelter and medicine, as well as taking 
proper measures for his protection.’

354
THE BROKEN GONG
‘If that’s so, Sire, it surely proves one clear advantage 
of the homeless life?’
‘Certainly, a decided advantage, Sir.’
‘Then call this the first such fruit of the homeless 
life, Sire.’
‘But can’t you indicate a more explicit, more 
profitable reward, Sir?’
‘Your Majesty, I can. But first I must put a few 
questions to you in return. Answer, Sire, as you see 
fit. What do you think? Imagine you had a farmer in 
your service, cultivating the land and paying taxes 
on his estate. “How strange,” he might say to himself. 
“How extraordinary are the fruits of merit! Here’s King 
Ajātasattu of Magadha who is a man; and I too am a 
man. The King is addicted to all five sense-pleasures, 
just like a god, while I’m a mere steward and tax-payer 
on his estate. Perhaps I too could have been a King like 
him. Suppose I earned myself some merit. Suppose I 
shaved off my hair and beard, donned saffron robes 
and renounced hearth and home for the homeless life.” 
If news of that farmer’s decision reached you, what 
would your response be? “Tell him to return here at 
once and start paying his tithes as before!”?’
‘No, Venerable Sir. We should, of course, pay him 
due respect, warmly welcome him, even bid him 
receive robes, food, shelter and medicine, as well as 
taking ‘That being so, Sire, it surely proves another 
clear advantage of the homeless life?’
‘Certainly, Sir.’
‘Then call this the second such fruit of the homeless 
life, Sire.’

355
HAROLD BEAVER
‘But can’t you show me some clear and outright 
reward, Sir, far in excess of these?’
‘Your Majesty, I can. But attend closely, I pray, to 
what I have to expound.’
‘Very well, Venerable Sir,’ the King assented. 
And the Blessed One continued: ‘Your Majesty, there 
sometimes arises in this world a Tathāgata, an Arahant, 
a Fully Self-Enlightened One who is endowed with 
supreme wisdom, practises perfect morality, speaks 
only what is beneficial, knows all three (animate, 
inanimate and conditioned) worlds, trains all who 
deserve to be trained, is teacher of gods and men as 
a unique, incomparable Buddha. Having penetrated 
ultimate truth (with its devas, Māras, Brahmās, samaṇas, 
princes and men) by his own superlative effort, he 
proclaims the Dhamma which is lovely in its beginning, 
lovely in its middle, lovely in its ending, in both
spirit and letter.16
A householder, or his son, hears the Dhamma. On 
hearing the Dhamma, he gains confidence in the 
Tathāgata. Once confident, he reflects: “This household 
life is confined and dusty; the homeless life is free as 
air. It is hard for a layman to pursue the Noble Practice 
in all its purity and polish like a conch-shell. Suppose 
I shaved off my hair and beard, donned saffron robes 
and renounced hearth and home for the homeless 
life.” So deserting his family circle and abandoning his 
property, he shaves hair and beard, dons saffron robes 
and goes forth into homelessness.

356
THE BROKEN GONG
As a recluse, he persistently restrains his body, 
speech and thought, skilfully perfecting his mindfulness 
and morality. And how, Sire, is a monk perfected in his 
morality?17 By never deliberately exterminating any 
form of life; by setting aside stick and sword; by always 
trembling with solicitude for all things living ...; by 
never taking what is not specifically given ...; by never 
succumbing to unchastity ...; by refraining from all base 
arts and mistaken means of livelihood ...; by uprooting 
all inclination towards lying ... or slander ... or harsh ... 
or frivolous talk. That is how a monk is perfected
in morality.
Like an anointed king, Sire, who has subdued his 
enemies, this bhikkhu no longer apprehends harm 
from any quarter; and the happiness he enjoys is wholly 
blameless, closely guarding the doors of his sixfold 
faculties. When he sees something visible with his eye, 
for example, he never clutches at the impression (be 
it male or female), or its characteristic way of moving 
or behaving, in case greed or dissatisfaction flares up 
and overwhelms him. That’s how he protects his eyefaculty from mental depravity. In the same way, on 
hearing a sound with the ear ... or smelling an odour 
with the nose ... or tasting a flavour with the tongue 
... or contacting objects with the body ... or thinking 
thoughts with the mind, he is on constant watch to 
discipline any involuntary reflex. That, Your Majesty, 
is how a monk guards the doors of his sixfold faculties.
But how, Sire, does a bhikkhu train himself in 
mindfulness and clear awareness? By never starting

357
HAROLD BEAVER
backwards or forwards without awareness; never 
glancing ahead or sideways without awareness; never 
bending or stretching his limbs without awareness; 
never wearing his outer and inner robes, or bearing his 
alms-bowl, without awareness; never eating, drinking, 
chewing or swallowing without awareness; never 
urinating or defecating without awareness; never 
walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep or waking 
without awareness; never speaking or observing silence 
without awareness. That, Your Majesty, is how a monk 
is endowed with mindfulness and clear awareness.
And how, Sire, does a bhikkhu learn contentment? 
By being satisfied with robes to protect his body and 
just enough alms-food to satisfy his belly so that, 
wherever he goes, he carries all his requisites with 
him, like a bird flying this way and that, burdened 
only by its wings. That, Your Majesty, is how a monk
learns contentment.
Then endowed with this Noble Morality, Noble SelfControl, Noble Mindfulness and Clear Awareness – as 
well as Noble Contentment – the bhikkhu chooses a 
lonely spot at the root of a forest tree, or on a hillside, 
or in a gorge, or in a mountain-cave, or in a cemetery, or 
in a jungle-thicket, or on a heap of straw. There – after 
eating on return from his alms-round – he sits crosslegged, immobile and upright, to establish mindfulness 
in meditation.
Thus abandoning worldly desires, he dwells with 
a mind free from covetousness; abandoning hatred 
and ill-will, he develops compassion for all things 
living; abandoning sloth, he clarifies and cleans his

358
THE BROKEN GONG
mind of torpor; abando ning worry and restlessness, 
he cultivates calmness and inner peace; abandoning 
doubt, he never wavers in his faith.
Your Majesty, suppose a man borrowed a loan, 
whose business prospering enabled him to discharge 
his debts and support his wife with the accumulated 
profit. He might well say to himself: “I used to speculate 
on borrowed capital. Now my business is flourishing. 
I’ve paid off all my old debts with profit to spare – I’m 
delighted to say – to provide for my wife and children.”
Or suppose a man was so stricken with fever that 
he lay too weak even to eat or stir. On recovering his 
health, he might well say to himself: “I used to be 
racked with pain, so sick that I could hardly eat, let 
alone move. Now my appetite’s come back, the fever’s 
gone – I’m delighted to say – and I’ve regained all my 
former strength.”
Or suppose a man were imprisoned only to be 
later freed without loss of goods. He might well say to 
himself: “I used to be locked up in prison. Now at last 
I’ve been released. I’m safe and sound – I’m delighted to 
say – with all my property intact.”
Or suppose a man were a slave, wholly dependent 
on his master and restricted in movement. Once 
emancipated, he might well say to himself: “I used to 
be a slave, subject to another’s whim, unable to move 
about as I pleased. Now that I’ve been freed – I’m 
delighted to say – I’m my own man again, able to go 
when and where I please.”
 Or suppose a merchant had led a caravan, laden with 
goods and treasure, across the desert where famine

359
HAROLD BEAVER
and untold dangers threatened. On approaching the 
outskirts of a village, he might well say to himself: 
“Half-starved, I took a caravan across the desert. Now 
that long and dangerous trek is done. I’m back on my 
home ground safe and sound – I’m delighted to say – 
with no material loss incurred.”
As long as a monk, Sire, has not shed the hindrances 
of greed, aversion, sloth, worry and doubt, he feels like a 
debtor, a patient, a prisoner, a slave, or a merchant on a 
desert crossing. As soon as he has clearly discarded the 
five hindrances (nīvaraṇas ), he feels like a discharged 
debtor, a recovered patient, a released prisoner, an 
emancipated slave, or a merchant on homecoming, 
overcome by gladness. From gladness arises rapture 
(pīti); from rapture, tranquillity (passaddhi ); from 
tranquillity, joy (sukha); from joy, a concentrated
mind (samādhi).
Thus, detached from sensual desires and all 
unwholesome factors, the bhikkhu enters and rests 
in the first jhāna (or tranced “absorption”), which is 
typified by conceptualization (vitakka) and discursive 
thinking (vicāra), accompanied by joy and rapture, 
until with this joy born of detachment he so soaks, 
drenches, permeates and suffuses his whole body that 
not the tiniest spot remains untouched.
Your Majesty, it’s just as when a bath-attendant, or 
his assistant, strews bath-powder into a brass bowl, 
gradually sprinkling it with water and kneading the 
moist mass until it sets. The water permeating that 
cake of soap, while suffusing it with unguents, remains

360
THE BROKEN GONG
unable to seep out. That, Sire, is the third clear and 
visible fruit of the homeless life, far exceeding the 
former two.
As conceptual and discursive thinking subsides, 
with enhanced concentration and inner calm the 
bhikkhu enters and rests in the second jhāna, suffusing 
the remotest parts of his body with rapture and joy.
Your Majesty, it’s just as when a deep lake, without 
inlets from either north or south or east or west, is 
replenished by water from a spring below. Despite only 
light and irregular rains, cool water welling up from 
that spring will soak, drench and permeate the whole 
until not a patch of the lake is not suffused. That, Sire, 
is the fourth sure and palpable fruit of the homeless 
life, far exceeding the former three.
As rapture fades, sensing in himself that joy of 
which the Noble Ones say, “Happy is he who dwells 
with composure in mindfulness,” the bhikkhu enters 
and rests in the third jhāna, suffusing the remotest 
parts of his body with bliss pure and unalloyed.
Your Majesty, it’s just as when blue or red or white 
lotuses grow submerged in a pond. They thrive under 
water – soaked, drenched and permeated from root 
to tip in cool water – until no part of any plant is not 
suffused. That, Sire, is the fifth sure and palpable fruit 
of the homeless life, far exceeding the former four.
Transcending gladness and sadness, the bhikkhu 
enters and rests in the fourth jhāna, composed to pure 
mindfulness beyond pleasure, beyond pain, suffusing 
the remotest parts of his body with intense lucidity.

361
HAROLD BEAVER
 Your Majesty, it’s just as when a man sits wrapped 
from head to toe in a white sheet that leaves not a 
patch of flesh exposed. That, Sire, is the sixth sure and 
palpable fruit of the homeless life, far in excess of the 
former five.
With his mind concentrated, cleansed and 
unblemished, pliable but firm and unperturbed, the 
bhikkhu turns to Insight-Knowledge (vipassanā ñanā ). 
He comprehends, that is to say, how this body of his 
is material, made of the four great elements, born of a 
union between his mother and father, fed on rice and 
gruel, impermanent, liable to disintegrate, requiring 
constant care and tender massaging; and how this is his 
consciousness which is attached to it and dependent
on it. 
Your Majesty, it’s just as when a jeweller, placing a 
beryl on his outstretched palm, lifts it up to his eyes. 
Carefully examining it, he reflects: “Yes, it’s genuine, all 
right. Well-cut. Strung on a multicoloured thread, yet 
flawless in every respect: brilliant, transparent, eightfaceted, crystal-clear.” That, Sire, is the seventh sure 
and palpable fruit of the homeless life, far in excess of 
the former six.
With his mind thus concentrated and firm, the 
bhikkhu now focuses on the creation of a mentallygenerated body: that is, out of his corporeal form he 
produces a mind-made entity complete with all its 
limbs, organs and faculties. Just as when drawing a stalk 
of grass from its sheath, or a sword from its scabbard, or 
a snake from its slough, Your Majesty, someone were to

362
THE BROKEN GONG
grasp the essential difference between husk and core. 
That, Sire, is the eighth sure and palpable fruit of the 
homeless life, far in excess of the former seven.
With his mind concentrated, cleansed and firm, 
the bhikkhu next turns to supernatural psychic 
power, such as being one, he becomes many; being 
many, he becomes one; he makes himself visible and 
again invisible; unhindered, he passes through fences, 
ramparts, mountains, as if through thin air; he plunges 
in and out of the earth as if plunging through water; he 
walks on water as if pacing on land; cross-legged, he 
travels through space like a winged bird, even touching 
and stroking the sun and moon (mighty though they 
are) with his hand; and with his body reaches as far as 
the Brahma world.
Your Majesty, it’s just as if a skilled potter, or his 
apprentice, were to form out of kneaded clay whatever 
shape of pot he desired. Or as if a skilled ivory-cutter, 
or his apprentice, were to produce from a smoothpolished elephant tusk whatever species of carving 
he might desire. Or as if a skilled goldsmith, or his 
apprentice, were to mould out of carefully wrought 
gold whatever ornament he might desire. That, Sire, is 
the ninth sure and palpable fruit of the homeless life, 
far in excess of the former eight.
With his mind concentrated, cleansed and firm, the 
bhikkhu next turns to the divine power of clairaudience 
until he can hear the sounds of both devas and men, 
whether nearby or far off.

363
HAROLD BEAVER
Your Majesty, it’s just as if a traveller on a highway 
were to catch the boom of a kettledrum, or the throb of 
a tabor, or the wail of a conch-shell, or the rat-a-tat of 
a snare drum, or the clashing of cymbals. That, Sire, is 
the tenth sure and palpable fruit of the homeless life, 
far in excess of the former nine.
With his mind concentrated, cleansed and firm, 
the bhikkhu next turns to the discrimination and 
penetration of other minds. He distinguishes all mental 
states and their opposites. He recognizes the lustful 
mind to be filled with lust and the dispassionate mind 
devoid of passion; the angry mind to be filled with hate 
and the compassionate mind devoid of hatred; the 
bewildered mind to be deluded and the undeluded mind 
devoid of distraction; the narrow mind to be constricted, 
the broad mind expanded, and the unsurpassed mind 
exalted. He knows the superior from the inferior, the 
concentrated from the unconcentrated, the liberated 
from the fettered mind.
Your Majesty, it’s just as when a girl or boy, in a fit 
of vanity, puts on make-up. They peer closely into a 
mirror, or bowl of clear water, to examine their face. 
“There’s a pimple,” they cry on spotting some flaw in 
the skin, or “Not a blackhead today!” if there’s none. 
That, Sire, is the eleventh sure and palpable fruit of the 
homeless life, far in excess of the former ten.
With his mind concentrated, cleansed and firm, the 
bhikkhu next turns to the recollection of past lives. He 
recalls one birth, or two, or three, or four, or five, or 
ten, or twenty, or thirty, or forty, or fifty, or a hundred,

364
THE BROKEN GONG
or a thousand, or a hundred thousand births, in several 
cycles of contraction and expansion, thinking to 
himself: “At that time my name was such-and-such, my 
clan was such-and-such, my caste was such-and-such; 
I ate such-and-such food; I enjoyed such-and-such 
pleasures; I suffered such-and-such pains. My lifespan 
was such-and-such. Having died in one existence, I was 
born again in another ... and another ... and another ...”
Your Majesty, it’s just as when someone travelling 
from village to village to village circles back to where 
he started. Once home, he might think to himself: “I 
left my own village for the neighbouring village where 
I stood or sat or spoke (or didn’t speak), and so on to 
the next village where I stood or sat or spoke (or didn’t 
speak), and so to the next ... and the next (with similar 
consequences) ... and here I’m back in my own village 
...” That’s how a monk recalls past births; and that, Sire, 
is the twelfth sure and palpable fruit of the homeless 
life, far in excess of the former eleven.
With his mind concentrated, cleansed and firm, the 
bhikkhu next turns to the divine power of clairvoyance 
until he can see life in the process of arising and passing 
away: both noble and ignoble beings; the well-favoured 
and the ugly; both those on a happy and unhappy 
trajectory, thinking to himself: “Friends! Whoever has 
inflicted physical, verbal or mental abuse, maligned 
the Noble Ones, and holding mistaken views made 
unavoidable wrong choices, will be reborn (on corporal 
dissolution) in a lower world, in a miserable condition, 
in continuous torment – in short, in hell. But whoever

365
HAROLD BEAVER
was pledged to physical, verbal and mental wellbeing, honoured the Noble Ones, and holding correct 
views made inevitable right choices, on death will be 
reborn on a higher plane, in a happier condition, in the 
heavenly world of the devas.”
Your Majesty, it’s just as if a lookout on the roof 
of a pinnacled mansion, with a 360-degree panorama 
at a crossroads, could spot everyone entering and 
leaving, strolling in the streets, or squatting near the 
intersection. That’s how a clairvoyant sees beings arise 
and pass; and that, Sire, is the thirteenth sure and 
palpable fruit of the homeless life, far in excess of the 
former twelve.
 With his mind concentrated, cleansed and firm, 
the bhikkhu last turns to the total extinction of all 
corruptions (āsavas ), until he understands suffering 
as it really is, the origin of suffering as it really is, 
the cessation of suffering as it really is, and the path 
leading to that cessation as it really is; also knowing 
the corruptions for what they really are, their origin, 
their cessation, and the path leading to that cessation. 
Thus delivered from the endless round of ignorant 
hankering after sensual pleasure, he recognizes: 
“This is liberation! Rebirth is routed! The holy life 
accomplished!”
Your Majesty, it is just as when a keen-sighted 
traveller in the mountains gazes from the bank of an 
upland lake into water so crystal-clear that he can see 
the fish darting about in shoals and shells and bars of 
gravel and pebbles and molluscs and bits of broken

366
THE BROKEN GONG
pottery scattered across the floor. That, Sire, is the 
fourteenth sure and palpable fruit of the homeless life, 
far in excess of the former thirteen. For a samaṇa can 
attain no other blessing, perceptible here and now, 
more perfect than this.’
At which King Ajātasattu exclaimed: ‘Wonderful, 
Sir! Quite wonderful! It’s like seeing someone pick up 
what’s been knocked upside down, or disclose what 
had lain hidden, or direct travellers who have lost their 
way, or hold up an oil-lamp in the dark for those with 
eyes to see. Even so has the Blessed One revealed the 
Dhamma to me in various ways. Venerable Sir, I take 
refuge in the Buddha, I take refuge in the Dhamma, I 
take refuge in the Sangha. May the Lord from this day 
forth accept me as a lay follower to the end of my days. 
Transgression overcame me, Lord – foolish, erring and 
wicked as I was. For the sake of the throne, I deprived 
my father – that good man and just king – of his life. 
May the Blessed One accept this confession of my guilt 
so that I may better contain myself in the future.’
‘Indeed, Sire, transgression overcame you when 
you deprived your father – that good man and just 
king – of his life. But now that you’ve acknowledged 
the deed and admitted your guilt, we shall accept your 
confession. For whoever acknowledges his sins, Your 
Majesty, promising to abstain from evil and make 
amends in future, will flourish in the Noble Practice.’
To which King Ajātasattu replied: ‘Let me take my 
leave, Venerable Sir. I am busy and have much to do.’
 ‘Feel free to go, Your Majesty, whenever you please.’

367
HAROLD BEAVER
Cheered at his compliance, the King rose from his 
seat, saluted the Blessed One and departed.
As soon as he was gone, the Lord said: ‘The King is 
done for! Monks, his fate is sealed! If only he had not 
put his father to death, then, as he sat here just now, 
the unpolluted, clear Dhamma-eye might have opened 
in him.’
Thus the Lord spoke and the monks rejoiced, 
delighting in his words.

11
Monks, too, could deploy parables. Elders such as 
Khemaka and Sāriputta, too, could exercise a ready 
wit.1 They, too, could draw on vivid anecdotes, local 
reportage, gossip and folklore, to pile parable on 
provoking parable. The Buddha’s style, even at its 
most dramatic, was clearly not unique, as the Pāyāsi 
Sutta ( Dīgha Nikāya  23) confirms. Admittedly, its 
protagonist, known as Young Kassapa, was described 
as ‘the best preacher in the Sangha’. 2 But his protean 
imagination and formidable debating skills must have 
been stretched to the limit for him to stand his ground 
against such sly obduracy.
For Prince Pāyāsi, it turns out, was a sceptical 
materialist (common enough today), harbouring the 
same set of dismissive dogmas as Ajita Kesakambalī 
whom King Ajātasattuhad consulted on his rounds. 3 
No intellectual, he doggedly reiterated his handful of

369
HAROLD BEAVER
tenets, word for word, against the monk’s onslaught: 
viz. there are no other worlds than ours; no devas; no 
mind-made dhammas; no kamma (effectual deeds), 
whether for good or ill. No wonder the versatile monk 
tried neither analytic, nor casuistic, nor doctrinaire 
approaches on this numskull, but simply blinded his 
dim wits with a plethora of (what today we might call) 
visual aids. Only a mixture of fact and fiction, he must 
have surmised, could touch the viceregal imagination.
For us, the interest lies in seeing how a firstgeneration Buddhist tackled such criminally obtuse 
contempt. The Buddha too, of course, had envisaged 
the possibility of scepticism when confronting the 
Kālāmas. ‘Yes, Kālāmas,’ he had argued, ‘you may well 
doubt … You may well be uncertain ... In uncertain 
matters, uncertainty does arise ...’ 4 But his advice 
all along had been never to rely on second-hand 
experience (on tradition, or legend, or teaching, or 
scripture, or conjecture, or hearsay, or logical inference, 
or extrapolation, or speculative theory, or conformity 
with received opinion), but rather on open-minded trial 
at first-hand. His was a consistent hands-on approach. 
Young Kassapa, on the other hand, confronted his pigheaded opponent head-on, by forcing him to envisage 
the constricting limits of unaided, uncompromising, 
indiscriminate and self-serving common sense.
The bhikkhu challenged this cold-blooded sadist 
with (1) the majesty of transcendent law (on the 
executioner’s block); (2) a comparison to the foul stench 
of our common humanity (in the cesspit); and (3) the

370
THE BROKEN GONG
sheer pettiness of human chronography compared 
to heaven’s inconceivable timescale (for the ThirtyThree Gods); and above all, (4) the impenetrability 
of metaphysical realms to our opaque, or astigmatic, 
sense-organs (the Parable of Those Blind from Birth). 
For what Prince Pāyāsi, in his self-delusion, had 
failed to grasp (he taught) was (5) the finely tuned 
reciprocity between this life and the next (the Parable 
of the Pregnant Wife); (6) the impalpable nature of 
daydreams, let alone consciousness (the Parable of 
the Midday Siesta); and (7)-(9) the palpable distinction 
between the naked and the dead (the Parables of 
the Ingot, of the Trumpeter Among Frontiersmen, 
and of the Fire-Worshipper’s Apprentice). The sutta 
culminates in a series of exasperated cautions against 
(10) naïve overconfidence in clichés (the Parable of 
the Two Caravans), as well as (11) obstinate truculence 
(the Parable of the Swineherd), and (12) unscrupulous 
trickery (the Parable of the Poisoned Dice), and (13) 
dim-witted, or pompous, obduracy (the Parable of the 
Two Scavengers).
I shall simply call the participants in this debate 
‘The Bhikkhu’ and ‘The Prince’.
*  *  *
THE PĀYĀSI SUTTA:
Thus have I heard. Once, on a tour of Kosala, the 
Venerable Kassapa came to a town called Setavyā, in a

371
HAROLD BEAVER
densely inhabited area of grassland, where he settled 
with some five hundred monks to the north in the 
Siṃsapā Forest.
Now Prince Pāyāsi resided there at the time – with 
royal prerogatives on a royal domain – brooding on 
three outrageous tenets: that no other worlds exist; 
nor beings spontaneously born; nor effects determined 
by good or evil deeds.
One midday, climbing up to the veranda for his siesta, 
the Prince saw a crowd of Brahmans and householders 
streaming through the North Gate towards the Siṃsapā 
Forest and enquired why. His steward informed him 
that the wanderer Kassapa, a disciple of the ascetic 
Gotama, had settled with five hundred monks in the 
forest and rumours had swept the town that he was 
an Arahant, a scholar and an astoundingly versatile 
speaker. ‘Then, Steward, ask the Brahmans to wait. Tell 
them the Prince is personally intent on attending the 
Wanderer.’ ‘Doubtless,’ he continued, muttering under 
his breath, ‘this Kassapa will already have taught those 
foolish Setavyans that there are other worlds; beings 
spontaneously born; and effects determined by good or 
evil deeds. Whereas the precise opposite is true.’ ‘Very 
well, Sire,’ interjected the steward, who left to deliver 
the message.
With due ceremony, Prince Pāyāsi joined the throng 
of Brahmans and householders in the forest. Having 
exchanged courtesies with the Venerable Kassapa, 
he sat down to one side while all round him the 
Brahmans were still either saluting with joined palms

372
THE BROKEN GONG
or announcing their names and clan-names. When 
everyone was seated at last, Prince Pāyāsi addressed 
the Venerable Kumāra-Kassapa:
 THE PRINCE: ‘I hold forthright views, Venerable 
Sir. They are these: that there are no other worlds; that 
beings cannot be spontaneously born; and that nothing 
is assured by good or evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, that’s a new one for me, Prince. 
I’ve never heard such tenets before. So may I question 
you about them, Prince? Please answer as you see fit. 
Do the sun and moon rotate through this world? Or 
through another world? And are they human, do you 
think, or divine?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Through another world, Reverend 
Kassapa; and they’re not human, of course, but divine.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Prince, in the same way it follows 
that there are other worlds and beings spontaneously 
born and results guaranteed by good and evil deeds.’
THE PRINCE: ‘Though you play the sophist with me, 
Sir, I stick to my view: that there are no other worlds, 
no beings spontaneously born, and no effects assured 
by good or evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘No doubt you have proof to back 
these contentions, Prince?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘What is it, pray?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Sir, I’ve had numerous friends and 
colleagues and blood relations who’ve committed 
murders and robberies and sexual affronts – and lied, 
for that matter, and cursed and swore. Whenever

373
HAROLD BEAVER
they succumbed to a mortal ailment, I visited them 
at the very point of death to say: “Certain Brahmans 
and ascetics declare that anyone who’s murdered and 
pillaged, or raped and lied, will be reborn after death in 
a most desolate spot – a place of torment and hell. Now 
you’ll be the first to admit to having been a notorious 
assassin and thief and rapist and liar so that if what 
these Brahmans and ascetics claim is true, you’ll 
undoubtedly go to hell. Now what I propose is this: if, 
on dying, you find yourself in this tormented place – 
this hell – please return to report that there are other 
worlds, and beings spontaneously born, and inevitable 
consequences flowing from our good and evil deeds. 
I, personally, have always found you dependable and 
trustworthy, my friend, so be my eyewitness. That’s all 
I ask. Whatever you attest, I shall treat as if I’d seen 
it with my own eyes. Your testimony will be decisive.” 
Each solemnly agreed; yet not one has ever returned 
as he promised, nor despatched a message even. That, 
in short, Reverend Kassapa, is my case for maintaining 
that there are no other worlds, that beings cannot be 
spontaneously born, and no consequences stem from 
either good or evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Let me question you, Prince. Let’s 
pursue this a step further. Feel free to answer as seems 
right. What do you think? Suppose a thief were dragged 
before you – one caught in the very act – and you were 
told: “Lord, this fellow was surprised red-handed. 
Sentence him as you see fit.” Your verdict might be: 
“Close-shave his head! Tie his arms fast behind his

374
THE BROKEN GONG
back! Drum him through the streets and squares and so 
out through the South Gate! There chop off his head!” 
“Very well, Sire,” they’d comply, and so frogmarching 
him through the streets and out through the South 
Gate, they’d sever his head. Now imagine that thief 
pleading with his executioners: “Good men, wait! Just 
one day, please! I’ve friends and colleagues and blood 
relations in this or that town or village. Grant me but a 
moment’s grace to visit them!” Would they let him go? 
Would they listen to him even? Or would they put an 
axe to that chattering head?’
THE PRINCE: ‘No, Reverend Sir, they’d not authorize 
a stay. He’d never succeed. They’d cut off his head.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘So, Prince, if this thief couldn’t 
persuade even human executioners to wait while 
he visited his relations and friends, how could your 
partners in crime, after perpetrating such admittedly 
horrendous misdeeds, prevail upon the warders of 
hell by pleading: “Good warders, please! Grant us 
a momentary reprieve to report to Prince Pāyāsi
that there is another world; that there are beings 
spontaneously born; and that kamma entails 
consequences even in hell!”?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Analogies be damned, Sir; I still 
maintain there are no other worlds, no beings 
spontaneously born, nor inevitable consequences to 
our deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Have you some other justification, 
then, for these contentions, Prince?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’

375
HAROLD BEAVER
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And what may that be?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I’ve also had friends and colleagues 
and blood relations, Reverend Sir, who have steadfastly 
abstained from taking lives, or seizing what’s not given, 
or committing sexual offences, or lying, or abusing the 
power of speech. I, too, approached their sickbeds, 
when they lay beyond hope of recovery, to say: “Certain 
Brahmans and ascetics declare that those who abstain 
from murder and theft and lying and depravity will be 
reborn after death in a blessed state, a heavenly world. 
Now since you’ve refrained from all such deeds, if 
what these Brahmans and ascetics claim is true, that’s 
surely where you’ll go. Now what I propose is this: if, on 
dying, you find yourself in this blessed – this heavenly 
– place, please come back to report that there are other 
worlds, and beings spontaneously born, and inevitable 
consequences flowing from our good and evil deeds. 
I, personally, have always found you gentlemen 
dependable and trustworthy, so be my eyewitnesses. 
That’s all I ask. Whatever you attest, I shall treat as if 
I’d seen it with my own eyes. Your testimony will be 
decisive.” And they too concurred; yet not one has ever 
returned as he promised, nor sent me a messenger 
even. That, in short, Reverend Kassapa, is my case for 
maintaining that there are no other worlds, no beings 
spontaneously born, no consequences stemming from 
good or evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, consider this parable, 
since lessons are often more readily absorbed by means 
of parables. Suppose someone had tumbled head first

376
THE BROKEN GONG
into a cesspit and you’d ordered your servants to pull 
him out. Very well, they pulled him out. Next you 
instructed them to scrape off the filth and give him a 
triple shampoo with yellow loam. Then to anoint him 
with oil and wash him down three times with fine soappowder. Then comb his hair and beard, dress him in 
white and adorn his head with garlands. Finally, you 
told them to escort him to your palace and there let 
him indulge all five senses to his heart’s content. Prince, 
what do you think? Would such a man, now that he’s 
cleansed and washed and combed and anointed and 
revelling in the palace desire to plunge back into the 
cesspit?’
THE PRINCE: ‘No, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And why not?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Because the cesspit is revolting and 
stinks to high heaven.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Exactly as human filth stinks to high 
heaven, Prince, and revolts the devas. So why on earth 
should your friends, who committed neither immoral 
nor criminal acts, and whose good fortune after death 
was to be born into a happier, heavenly world, come 
back to report that there is indeed another world 
and beings spontaneously born and consequences 
attendant on good and evil deeds?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Whatever corollaries you draw, Sir, I 
will still maintain there are no other worlds, no beings 
spontaneously born, nor guaranteed consequences to 
our deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Have you some other justification, 
then, for these assertions, Prince?’

377
HAROLD BEAVER
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And what may that be?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I’ve had friends, Reverend Kassapa, 
who abstained from taking lives, seizing what’s not 
given, consuming strong liquor or enervating drugs, 
yet when on their deathbeds I ask them to pay a return 
visit from the Thirty-Three Gods (whose company, 
the Brahmans assure us, they’ll join), they never do 
– despite their promises – nor bother to send back a 
messenger even. That, in short, Sir, is my reason for 
maintaining that there are no other worlds, no beings 
spontaneously born, no sure issue from good or evil 
deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Let me question you, Prince. Let’s 
look into this further. Please answer as you see fit. A 
timespan – which, on our scale, extends to, say, one 
hundred years, Prince – for the Thirty-Three Gods lasts 
but a day. Or day and night. Thirty of which make a 
month; twelve of such months, a year; and a thousand 
such years, the lifespan of the Thirty-Three Gods. Now 
suppose your friends decided: “We’ll indulge our five 
senses for just two or three days, then we’ll return to 
Pāyāsito to tell him there are other worlds as well as 
spontaneously born beings and infallible consequences 
of good and evil deeds.” Would that have been feasible?’
THE PRINCE: ‘No, Reverend Sir, surely not, since we 
should long ago have died. But what evidence have you 
for these statistics? Who informed you that the ThirtyThree Gods are so long-lived? As for me, I don’t believe 
that the Thirty-Three Gods exist, let alone live so long!’

378
THE BROKEN GONG
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Prince, imagine a man blind from 
birth who cannot tell dark from light, let alone make 
out blue, yellow, red or crimson-coloured patches, 
distinguish rough from smooth surfaces (except by 
touch), or watch the moon and stars by night. He 
might well conclude: “There are no blue, yellow, red or 
crimson-coloured patches, no darker or lighter shapes, 
no rougher or smoother textures, no sun or moon or 
stars, nor anybody who can perceive them. For if I can’t 
see them, it follows that no one else can; and if no one’s 
aware of them, they can’t exist.” Would that be a sound 
line of inference, Prince? Would that seem a legitimate 
deduction?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Far from it, Reverend Sir, since, 
of course, there are coloured patches, rougher and 
smoother surfaces, lighter and darker shapes, as well 
as the sun by day and the moon by night. So anyone 
inferring their non-existence from the premise “I’m 
not aware of them, I cannot see them”, wouldn’t 
just be implausible – or illogical – merely so much as 
downright wrong.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, it seems you resemble 
the blind man in casting doubts on my axiom about 
the Thirty-Three Gods and their extended lifespan. 
Other worlds can’t be observed as you seem to think, 
with the mere physical eye. Those ascetics who seek 
out jungle retreats to purge the divine eye, it is they 
– with the force of clairvoyant sight – who pierce the 
veil that divides this world from the next and perceive 
beings spontaneously born. That’s how transcendent

379
HAROLD BEAVER
worlds are transfixed. So confess, Prince, that there are 
other worlds as well as beings spontaneously born and 
incalculable consequences from good and evil deeds.’
THE PRINCE: ‘However subtle your exposition, Sir, 
I still hold fast. There are no other worlds, I say, no 
beings spontaneously born, no consequences flowing 
from good and evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Then have you some further way of 
vindicating these propositions, Prince?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And what may that be?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Just look at these rows of Brahmans 
silently sitting here – all profoundly moral and wellconducted men, who like comfort and dislike suffering, 
who want to live and not to die. Though, once dead, 
they’re convinced they’ll be well off – better off than 
folks who cut their throats, or take poison, or jump off 
cliffs, or string themselves up – yet they nevertheless 
continue to prefer life to death; they prefer, that is, 
longing for comfort and assuaging their sufferings here. 
That, Reverend Kassapa, is my reason for maintaining 
that there are no other worlds, no beings spontaneously 
born, nor certain issue from good or evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, consider this parable, 
since lessons are often more readily absorbed by means 
of parables. Once upon a time a certain Brahman had 
two wives, of whom one had borne a son, now ten or 
twelve years old, while the other was pregnant and 
nearing her term – when the Brahman died. The youth, 
thereupon, told the junior wife: “Lady, the whole

380
THE BROKEN GONG
inheritance – gold, silver, property, whatever – is mine. 
My father made me his heir.” To which the co-wife 
replied: “Young man, wait till I’ve given birth. If the 
infant’s a boy, a portion shall be his. If a girl, she shall 
serve you.” The youth grimly repeated his claim and 
again she stood her ground. On the third repetition, 
though, she dashed into an inner room and, seizing 
a knife, sliced open her belly, desperate to discover 
whether it was a boy or girl. And thus she destroyed 
not only herself, fool that she was, but the living foetus 
and his share of the wealth, in seeking an inheritance 
without reckoning the hidden cost.
So, too, Prince, you incite hidden perils by advocating 
forced entry into another world. Just like that foolish 
Brahman lady in pursuit of her inheritance. But these 
Brahmans don’t seek to precipitate what’s not yet ripe, 
but rather, in their wisdom, await its ripening. Since 
this very life is profitable. The longer these Brahmans 
can stay alive, the greater the merit they may create, 
by practising for the welfare and happiness of many, 
out of compassion for the world and to the benefit 
of men and devas. So confess, Prince, that there are 
other worlds as well as beings spontaneously born and 
sequels determined by good and evil deeds.’
THE PRINCE: ‘Whatever cautions you cite, Reverend 
Kassapa, I shall continue to maintain: “There are no 
other worlds, no beings spontaneously born, no fruit of 
good and evil deeds.”’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Then perhaps you have some further 
justification for your repeated claim?’

381
HAROLD BEAVER
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Which is what, Prince?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Again, take the case of a thief, caught 
red-handed and dragged before me. My officers will 
urge: “Lord, we caught this thief red-handed. Sentence 
him as you see fit.” And I, for example, may devise this 
punishment. “Bind him,” I say, “and stuff him live into 
a jar. Seal its mouth with a moistened skin and give it 
a good coating of thick clay; then shove it into an oven 
and light the fire.” No sooner said than done. When 
we’re sure the fellow’s dead, we pull out the jar, break 
the clay, uncover the mouth, continually watching 
in the hope of seeing his soul escape. 5 But we never 
do. We’ve never seen a soul escape. And that’s why, 
Reverend Kassapa, I believe there are no other worlds, 
no beings spontaneously born, nor inevitable fruit of 
good and evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Prince, some further questions, 
please. Answer as you see fit. On retiring for a siesta, 
do you ever recall seeing visions of lovely parks and 
forests and lotus ponds, as it were?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I do, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And aren’t you attended at all 
such times by retainers: your retinue of dwarves and 
hunchbacks and maidens-in-waiting?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I am, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And do they observe your soul 
slipping out of – or back into – your body?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Never, Reverend Kassapa.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘So they don’t see your soul emerging

382
THE BROKEN GONG
when you’re alive. So how could you expect to see it 
escaping from a corpse? Confess, then, Prince, that 
there are other worlds; there are beings spontaneously 
born; there are inevitable consequences to good and 
evil deeds.’
THE PRINCE: ‘I cannot give ground, Reverend 
Sir. There are no other worlds, I repeat, no beings 
spontaneously born; no moral consequences to good 
and evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Perhaps, then, you have an 
additional cause for pressing your claim?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And what may that be?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Again, take the case of a thief caught 
red-handed and brought before me. My officers will 
urge: “Lord, we caught this thief red-handed. Sentence 
him as you see fit.” And I propose this punishment. 
“Take him,” I say, “and weigh him live on a pair of 
scales. Then strangle him before carefully weighing 
him again.” No sooner said than done. And the result 
of this experiment? While alive, the thief was lighter, 
softer, suppler; once dead, decidedly heavier, stiffer, 
tighter. And that, Reverend Kassapa, is why I maintain 
that there are no other worlds, no beings spontaneously 
born, nothing generated by our good and evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, consider this parable, 
since lessons are often more readily absorbed by means 
of parables. Suppose a blacksmith weighed a glowing 
ingot that had been in the forge all day; then weighed 
it again after it had cooled. On which occasion would it

383
HAROLD BEAVER
be lighter, softer, suppler? When fiery hot? Or after the 
heat died down?’
THE PRINCE: ‘As long as the ingot was fired, Reverend 
Sir, it would of course be lighter, softer, suppler. Grown 
cold – with flames and air dispersed – it would grow 
proportionally heavier, stiffer, tighter.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, it’s just the same with 
the body. Possessed of life and heat and consciousness, 
it is lighter, softer, suppler. Once deprived of life and 
heat and consciousness, it turns heavier, stiffer, tighter. 
Prince, there’s only one conclusion to draw: that there 
are other worlds; there are spontaneously born beings; 
there are intractable after-effects to our good and evil 
deeds.’
THE PRINCE: ‘Twist as you will, Sir, I still repeat: 
there are no other worlds, no beings spontaneously 
born, no after-effects to our deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Have you yet further reason, then, 
for insisting on this?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I have, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘And what is that?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Again, Reverend Sir, let us take the 
case of a thief brought before me. This time, when 
urged to give a sentence, I may propose: “Kill him, but 
mind you don’t rip his skin (tearing neither dermis nor 
epidermis), nor gash his flesh, nor dislocate his bones, 
nor twist his sinews, nor spill his marrow.” No sooner 
said than done. “Now turn him on his back,” I say, 
when he’s already half-dead, “and maybe we’ll spot his 
soul emerging.” But we don’t. We never spot his soul

384
THE BROKEN GONG
emerging. So I tell them to roll him to one side ... to 
the other side ... face down ... prop him upright ... stand 
him on his head ... thump him with their fists ... stone 
him ... thrash him with sticks ... prick him with swords 
... shake him this way and that ... until we can spot his 
soul emerging. And the officers flop him over and prop 
him up and turn him upside down and thump and stone 
and thrash and shake him; but though he still has eyes, 
he cannot see; though he still has ears, he cannot hear; 
though he still has a nose, he cannot smell; though he 
still has a tongue, he cannot taste; though he still has a 
body, he cannot feel. That’s why, Revered Sir, I believe 
there are no other worlds, no beings spontaneously 
born, no sure consequences to our deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, consider this parable, 
since lessons are often more readily absorbed by means 
of parables. Once upon a time, a trumpeter visited a 
frontier district with his conch-shell. On coming to a 
village, he took up his post at its centre, blew his conchshell three times, set the conch-shell on the ground 
and sat down to one side.
Now that puzzled the locals. At once they asked 
themselves: “Where did this sound come from that’s so 
beautiful, so exciting, so intoxicating, so entrancing, so 
utterly captivating?” Gathering round the trumpeter, 
they asked him: “Sir, how did you make such a 
beautiful, such an exciting, such an intoxicating, such 
an entrancing, such an utterly captivating sound?” 
“Friends,” he replied, “it was this conch-shell that 
made the sound.”

385
HAROLD BEAVER
Crying, “Speak, Sir Trumpet, speak!” they grabbed 
it and flung it on its back. But, no, it just went “clonk”. 
They laid it mouth down ... tossed it this way and that 
... propped it over on one side and upside down ... 
thumped it with their fists ... chucked clods of earth at 
it ... thrashed it with sticks ... poked it with swords ... 
shook it sideways, downwards, upwards ... all the time 
crying, “Speak, Sir Trumpet, speak!” But it made no 
sound. No trumpet-sound.
What struck the trumpeter, throughout these 
proceedings, was: “What clowns these border folk are! 
What idiotic goings-on! How can they expect to hear a 
sound unless they tackle things right!” So, with all the 
villagers watching, he picked up his conch-shell, gave 
it three blasts and sauntered off.
At last it dawned on the frontiersmen. “Ah!” they 
sighed, “When that conch-shell was connected with 
a human being, and was connected with exertion, 
and was connected with wind, then it made a sound. 
But when that conch-shell was not connected with a 
human being, was not connected with exertion, was 
not connected with wind, then that conch-shell was 
mute!” In the same way, Prince, when this body is 
possessed by life, is possessed by heat, is possessed by 
consciousness, then it flits hither and thither, stands, 
sits and lies down, perceives with its eyes, listens with 
its ears, smells with its nose, tastes with its tongue, 
feels with its nerve-ends and knows with its mind. 
But when deprived of life, deprived of heat, deprived 
of consciousness, it can do none of these things. So,

386
THE BROKEN GONG
Prince, rest assured that there are other worlds, beings 
spontaneously born and results assured by our good 
and evil deeds.’
THE PRINCE: ‘Whatever you may say, Reverend 
Kassapa, I still maintain there are no other worlds, no 
beings spontaneously born, no knock-on effects from 
our good and evil deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Yet again I must ask: can you 
substantiate that proposition, Prince?’
THE PRINCE: ‘I can, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Then tell me how, Prince.’
THE PRINCE: ‘Once again, Reverend Kassapa, take 
the case of a thief brought before me. This time, when 
urged to give a sentence, I propose: “First, slice by 
slice, detach his outer skin and maybe we’ll see his 
soul emerging. Then, step by step, peel off the inner 
skin, scrape away the flesh, pluck out the sinews, 
strip clean the bones, gouge out the bone marrow ...” 
Nevertheless, not once have we seen his soul emerging. 
That’s why, Reverend Sir, I believe there are no other 
worlds; no beings spontaneously born; no long-term 
consequences resulting from our deeds.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, consider this parable, 
since lessons are often more readily absorbed by 
means of parables. Once upon a time, a mat-haired 
fire-worshipper settled in the jungle in a leaf-hut. 
One night he heard a band of nomads camp nearby 
and later move on. So the fire-worshipper decided to 
inspect the site in case anything serviceable had been 
left behind. Rising early, he found the site and there

387
HAROLD BEAVER
saw an abandoned baby boy sprawled daintily on his 
back. And he was overwhelmed by the thought: “It’s 
wrong to let a human being die. I’d better carry him 
to my shelter and foster him and feed him.” And that’s 
what he did.
When the lad was about ten or twelve years old, the 
hermit – having a function to attend – told him: “I’ve 
some business nearby. You watch the fire, my son. And 
make sure you don’t let it die. Here’s an axe, though, 
should you need it, some sticks, as well as fire-sticks 
to rekindle the fire just in case it goes out.” With these 
instructions the hermit set off.
The lad, sure enough, became so absorbed in his 
play that he let the fire go out. When he noticed the 
charred wood, he thought: “Now what did Father say? 
Something about an axe ... some sticks ... as well as firesticks to rekindle the fire. I’d better get cracking!” So 
he chopped up the fire-sticks with the axe, thinking: 
“That’s how to kindle a fire, I expect.” But not a spark 
flew. Next he sliced the fire-sticks into two, into three, 
into four, into five, ten, a hundred slivers; he splintered 
them, he pounded them in a mortar, he winnowed 
them in the wind, desperately repeating: “That’s how 
to kindle a fire, I expect!” But not a flame flickered.
“Why did you let the fire go out, Son?” was the first 
thing the hermit said on his return; and when the lad 
told him what had happened, he fumed: “What an ass 
the boy is! What an absurd way to try lighting a fire!” 
So, with the lad looking on, he took what was left of 
the fire-sticks and rekindled the fire, saying: “Watch

388
THE BROKEN GONG
carefully, Son. This is how to ignite kindling, not the 
silly way you tried!”
In the same way, Prince, consider how you, too, are 
absurdly, desperately, foolishly searching for another 
world. Drop this sour attitude, Prince, give it up! Don’t 
let it be a source of misery and misfortune to you for 
years to come!’
THE PRINCE: ‘Though you hammer the point home, 
Reverend Sir, I can’t bear to give it up. King Pasenadi 
of Kosala is well aware of my convictions. As are 
several other kings abroad. If I were to abandon them 
now, they’d say: “What an ass Prince Pāyāsi is! How 
perversely he stuck to his views!” So I’m just landed 
with them, I’m afraid, out of self-respect – and spite!’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well then, Prince, consider this 
parable, since a lesson is often more readily absorbed 
by means of parables. Once upon a time, a caravan of 
a thousand carts was travelling from east to west, so 
huge that wherever it passed it exhausted all available 
fuel and greenstuff. Now this caravan consisted of 
two groups of five hundred carts, both with their own 
leader. Holding council together, they decided to go 
each their own way to economize on supplies. So the 
caravan was split; and, collecting plenty of grass, wood 
and water, one leader set off. After some two or three 
days’ journey, he saw a weather-beaten stranger with 
bloodshot eyes, approaching. A quiver hung on one 
shoulder and a wreath of white water-lilies crowned 
his head. Both hair and clothes looked soaked, while 
the wheels of his donkey-cart were splashed with mud.

389
HAROLD BEAVER
“Where d’you come from, good sir?” the caravan 
leader hailed him.
“From such-and-such,” the stranger answered. 
“And where are you going?”
“To so-and-so,” the stranger answered.
“Has there been much rainfall ahead, then?”
“Indeed, sir, a regular downpour; the land is deluged; 
and there’s plenty of grass, wood and water. I suggest 
you toss out your stores. With carts lighter-laden, you 
won’t tire your oxen so fast and make better progress.”
The leader relayed this information to the carters 
and they did just that. They ditched their stock of 
provisions to lighten their carts. But at the next 
campsite they found not a trace of grass, wood or water; 
nor at the second, the third, the fourth, fifth, sixth or 
seventh. And so they all came to grief. Every man jack – 
with his cattle – was devoured by that yakkha until only 
their bones lay scattered.
Meanwhile, the leader of the second caravan 
concluded his preparations, stocking up on grass, wood 
and water. Two or three days into the crossing, he too 
met the weather-beaten stranger, with bloodshot eyes, 
approaching – his hair wet, his clothes soaked – wearing 
a quiver on one shoulder and a wreath of white waterlilies on his head; and again driving a donkey-cart 
whose wheels were splashed with mud.
“Where d’you come from, good sir?” the caravan 
leader hailed him.
“From such-and-such,” the stranger answered. 
“And where are you going?”

390
THE BROKEN GONG
“To so-and-so,” the stranger answered.
“Has there been much rainfall ahead, then?”
“Indeed, sir, a regular downpour; the land is deluged; 
and there’s plenty of grass, wood and water. I suggest 
you toss out your stores. With carts lighter-laden, you 
won’t tire your oxen so fast and make better progress.”
So the leader assembled his carters, saying: “This 
fellow advised us to jettison our stores, with news of 
copious supplies ahead. But he’s neither a friend nor 
relation, so why should we trust him? Rather than 
discarding our provisions, therefore, I suggest we 
prudently follow the trail.” They unanimously agreed. 
And at the next campsite they found not a trace of 
grass, wood or water; nor at the second, the third, the 
fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh – where they discovered 
the debris of the first caravan and the scattered bones 
of men and cattle devoured by the yakkha. There the 
leader once again assembled his carters, saying: “That 
caravan came to grief through reckless confidence. 
Now’s our chance for scavenging all valuables from 
their train and weeding out the junk from ours.” Which 
they did. And under such wise command they passed 
safely across the desert. 
You too, Prince, will come to a sorry end if you persist 
on seeking another world in such a reckless way. Those 
who trust the first thing they hear are heading for 
destruction – just like that caravan. So drop this sour 
attitude, Prince! Give it up, I say! Don’t let it be a source 
of misery and misfortune to you for years to come!’

391
HAROLD BEAVER
THE PRINCE: ‘Despite your solemn appeal, Reverend 
Sir, I can’t afford to give it up. King Pasenadi of Kosala 
is privy to my convictions. As are several other kings 
abroad. If I were to abandon them now, they’d say: 
“What an ass Prince Pāyāsi is! How perversely he clung 
to his views!” So I’m just landed with them, I’m afraid, 
out of self-justification – and spite!’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well then, consider this parable, 
Prince, since a lesson is often more readily absorbed 
by means of parables. Once upon a time, a swineherd 
was passing from his village to the next when he saw 
a heap of dry dung. “Chucked out!” he thought. “What 
a waste! That would make fine fodder for my pigs. I’ll 
cart it off.” So he spread out his cloak, scraped up the 
dung, and gathering it into a bundle, raised it to his 
head. On the way home, however, clouds gathered and 
he was caught in a storm, till the melting turds oozed 
and spattered him all over with dung right down to his 
heels. Yet on he trudged. “Hey!” passers-by shouted, 
“Are you bonkers? Have you lost your marbles? Why 
cart that crap on your head? It’s drooling all over you!” 
“Smart-arse, eh? This stuff’s for my pigs, you jackass 
...” Prince, you sound just like the swineherd in my 
parable. Ditch that dung, I tell you! Give it up! Don’t let 
it be a source of misery and misfortune to you for years 
to come!’
THE PRINCE: ‘Despite your imprecation, Reverend 
Sir, I just can’t give it up. King Pasenadi of Kosala, as 
well as other kings, know my convictions. If I were to 
chuck them now, they’d say: “What a jackass Prince

392
THE BROKEN GONG
Pāyāsi is!” So I’m constrained to cling to my views out 
of self-righteousness – and spite!’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well then, consider this parable, 
Prince, since a lesson is often more readily absorbed 
by means of parables. Once upon a time, two gamblers 
were tossing nuts instead of dice; and whenever an 
unlucky “dice” was thrown, one of them swallowed it. 
“Well played! You’ve won!” the other congratulated 
him. “Just pass me those nuts, my friend, and I’ll 
dedicate them as an offering.” “O.K.,” the trickster 
agreed and handed them over. After injecting the nuts 
with poison, his adversary proposed: “Come, let’s have 
another game!” “Fine.” So they resumed their play. 
And again, when an unlucky “dice” was thrown, the 
trickster swallowed it while the other, grimly eyeing 
him, chanted:
“The dice is smeared with searing stuff, 
Though he who swallows doesn’t cough! 
Gulp it down, cheat! And swallow well! 
Bitter it proves and burns like hell!”
Prince, you talk just like the gambler in my parable. 
Drop this sour attitude, Prince! Give it up, I say. Don’t 
let it be a source of misery and misfortune to you for 
years to come!’
THE PRINCE: ‘But what am I to do, Reverend Kassapa? 
Too many are apprised of my views. I’d be universally 
mocked if I abandon them now. I’m just stuck with 
them, I’m afraid, out of self-righteousness – and spite!’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well then, Prince, here’s one last 
parable, since a lesson is often more readily absorbed

393
HAROLD BEAVER
by means of parables. Once upon a time, after a mass 
migration to a new land, a huckster proposed: “Let’s go 
reconnoitre! We might pick up something valuable!” 
His friend agreed and so they crossed into the 
neighbourhood where, in the very first village, they 
stumbled on a pile of hemp that had been tossed aside. 
“Why, here’s some hemp!” the huckster exclaimed. 
“You tie up one bundle and I’ll tie up another; then 
we can both cart it off.” Which they did. Proceeding to 
the next village, they discovered some hemp-thread. 
“What have we here?” the huckster exclaimed. “This 
pile of hemp-thread is just what we wanted the hemp 
for. Let’s dump our two bundles of hemp and continue 
with a load of hemp-thread each.” “I’ve lugged my 
pack this far,” his friend insisted, “and it’s well tied 
up. That’s enough for me. You do as you please.” So his 
companion threw down the hemp and shouldered the 
hemp-thread instead.
In the next village street what should they find but a 
pile of hemp-cloth? “Why, this hemp-cloth is just what 
we wanted the hemp and hemp-thread for! You dump 
your hemp and I’ll dump my hemp-thread and we’ll 
continue on our way with a load of hemp-cloth each.” 
But his friend demurred: “I’ve lugged my pack this far 
and it’s well tied up. That’s enough for me. You do as 
you please.” So the huckster threw down the hempthread and shouldered the hemp-cloth instead.
In the next village they saw a pile of flax ... in another, 
linen-thread ... in another, linen-cloth ... in another, 
cotton ... in another, cotton-thread ... in another,

394
THE BROKEN GONG
cotton-cloth ... in another, iron ... in another, copper ... 
in another, tin ... in another, lead ... in another, silver ... 
in another, gold. Then the huckster said: “This pile of 
gold is just what we wanted the hemp, hemp-thread, 
hemp-cloth, flax, linen-thread, linen-cloth, cotton, 
cotton-thread, cotton-cloth, iron, copper, tin, lead and 
silver for. You dump your hemp and I’ll dump my silver 
and we’ll go on our way with a load of gold each.” But 
his friend shrugged: “I’ve lugged my pack of hemp this 
far and it’s well tied up. That’s enough for me. You do 
as you please.” So the huckster threw down the silver 
and shouldered a load of gold instead.
When they’d circled back to their village, the friend 
who brought home the hemp failed to please either 
his parents, or wife, or children, or colleagues; he even 
failed to derive satisfaction from it himself. But the 
wily entrepreneur who returned with a load of gold, 
delighted his parents, his wife and children, his friends 
and colleagues, as well as deriving lasting joy and 
happiness from it himself.
Prince, you talk just like the hemp-bearer in my 
parable. Drop this sour attitude, Prince! Give it up, I 
say! Don’t let it be a source of misery and misfortune to 
you for years to come!’
THE PRINCE (turning to the assembled Brahmans 
and householders): ‘I was enchanted by the Reverend 
Kassapa’s first parable, but resolved to test his quick wits 
on further debate.’ (Turning to the Reverend Kassapa): 
‘Excellent, Sir! Excellent! You’ve proved a worthy 
opponent! Like someone setting upright what had

395
HAROLD BEAVER
been knocked down, or giving directions to a traveller 
gone astray, or beaming an oil-lamp into the dark till 
all with eyes can see. In such multitudinous ways has 
the Reverend Kassapa expounded the Dhamma that 
I, Sir, now seek refuge in the Blessed Lord, and in the 
Dhamma, and in the Sangha. May the Reverend Kassapa 
accept me from this day forth as a lay disciple as long as 
life shall last! Furthermore, instruct me, Reverend Sir, 
how to perform a great sacrifice which may be to my 
lasting benefit and well-being.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Prince, any sacrifice at which oxen, 
or goats, or fowls, or pigs are slaughtered is bound to be 
neither particularly illuminating nor effective unless 
celebrated with right view, right aspiration, right 
speech, right conduct, right livelihood, right effort, 
right mindfulness, right concentration. Suppose, 
Prince, a farmer went to plough some virgin land where 
the soil was poor and riddled with stumps. If his seeds 
were stale, and improperly sown, and the rains came 
late, would those seeds germinate? Would they grow? 
And would the farmer harvest a full crop?’
THE PRINCE: ‘No, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘Well, Prince, it’s the same with 
sacrifices at which oxen, or goats, or fowls, or pigs are 
unmindfully slain. But where nothing is slain and the 
celebrants are mindfully engaged with right view, right 
aspiration, right speech, right conduct, right livelihood, 
right effort, and right concentration, there the sacrifice 
is bound to be brilliantly effective. Suppose, Prince, 
a farmer went to plough some well-tilled land, with

396
THE BROKEN GONG
fertile soil, from which all stumps had been uprooted. If 
his seeds were fresh, and properly sown, and the rains 
were punctual, would those seeds germinate? Would 
they grow? And would the farmer harvest a full crop?’
THE PRINCE: ‘Certainly, Reverend Sir.’
THE BHIKKHU: ‘So, too, a sacrifice where nothing 
is slaughtered. That alone is richly – luminously – 
productive.’
*  *  *
That concludes Prince Pāyāsi’s session with the 
Venerable Kumāra-Kassapa. The bhikkhu’s cascade of 
parables had triumphed; the Prince, surrendered. He 
had not only abandoned his odious views, but taken 
refuge in the Buddha as a lay disciple. It remains 
anyone’s guess whether he really intended to pursue 
the arduous Eightfold Path. But it was a recognition of 
a sort.
An epilogue supplies just the right dash of ambiguity 
to this peripeteia. Prince Pāyāsi, we’re told, established 
a charity for wanderers, beggars and needy Brahmans, 
where a young Brahman, called Uttara, was charged 
with dispensing split rice in sour gruel and coarse, 
fringed clothing. 6 Until, that is, rumours reached the 
palace of slighting remarks overheard in the dispensary.
So Uttara was summoned and asked whether the 
rumour was true that he’d said: ‘Through this charity 
I’m associated with Prince Pāyāsi – but in this world 
only, not the world to come’?

397
HAROLD BEAVER
‘That’s right, Lord’, he declared.
‘But why? Why cast such aspersions, Friend Uttara? 
Don’t all seeking merit expect rewards for their 
charity?’
‘But, Lord, the food you contributed – split rice 
in sour gruel – you wouldn’t dream of touching with 
your feet, let alone your lips. Those coarse, fringed 
clothes – you wouldn’t deign to step on, let alone wear. 
Lord, you’re considerate and gentle to us, so how can 
we square your bounty with such meanness? Your 
courtesy with such harshness?’
‘Very well, Uttara, organize a distribution of food 
such as I eat and a supply of clothes such as I wear’.
‘Certainly, Lord.’ And he made arrangements 
accordingly. Not that this change of heart (if such it 
was) did the Prince much good. For it wasn’t the source 
of the charity, but the spirit in which it was dispensed, 
that was now at issue. Because of his grudging gifts, 
made through others’ hands, as if casually tossed 
aside, he was reborn at death in the company of the 
Four Great Kings. 7 While Uttara, who had dispersed 
the princely largesse unstintingly with his own hands 
and due concern, was reborn at death in the heavenly 
realm of the Thirty-Three Gods.8
*  *  *
Even here, however, folk interest was not exhausted; 
but a tall tale is appended to drive an increasingly 
bizarre point home.

398
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Now at that time the Venerable Gavampati was 
in the habit of ascending to the lower heavens for 
his siesta; and Pāyāsi, now a deva, approached the 
Venerable Gavampati and saluted him:9
“Who are you, my friend?” asked the bhikkhu.
“Lord, I am Prince Pāyāsi.” 
“Friend, aren’t you the one who used to say: ‘There 
are no other worlds; no beings spontaneously born; no 
inevitable consequences from good or evil deeds’?”
“True, Lord. There was a time I said this. But I 
was converted from that mistaken view by the noble 
Kumāra-Kassapa.”
“And where has that young Brahman, in charge of 
your dispensary, been reborn?”
“Lord, because he gave unstintingly – with his own 
hands and due concern – he was reborn in the company 
of the Thirty-Three Gods, while I who tossed scraps 
grudgingly aside – without due concern – was reborn 
in this deserted villa here. Please, Lord, on returning to 
earth, tell people to give liberally with their own hands 
and inform them how Prince Pāyāsi and the Brahman 
Uttara were reborn.”’
So the story comes full circle and even the Venerable 
Kassapa is, in the end, proved wrong. For someone does 
mysteriously return from ‘the blessed, the heavenly’ 
world. The Venerable Gavampati, fresh from his 
siesta, reports that we should give ungrudgingly with 
our own hands, quoting the example of Prince Pāyāsi 
who, failing to do this, was reborn, at death, in the

399
HAROLD BEAVER
realm of the Four Great Kings, and that of the Brahman 
Uttara, his zealous administrator, reborn in the higher, 
heavenly zone of the Thirty-Three Gods.

12
Traditionally, the Dhamma consisted of 84,000 verses 
or sayings (Dhammakhandhas). The Buddha’s loyal 
attendant, Ānanda, claimed:
‘Eighty-two thousand teachings from the Buddha are 
known to me; two thousand more from his disciples. Now 
eighty-four thousand I’ve received.’1
But this cipher was no more than a commonplace 
synonym for infinity: for cities, say, in a populous 
kingdom; or wives in a royal harem; or meditation 
subjects suited to various temperaments; or auditors 
enlightened by a single Dhamma talk; or the dizzying 
vista of generation, after generation, after generation 
of rebirths.2 In fact, the first four Nikāyas alone contain 
some 17,505 discourses in all. The Buddhist Catechism  
(1881), devised by the American Colonel Olcott, includes 
the following exchange:

401
HAROLD BEAVER
QUESTION: ‘In the whole text of the three Piṭakas, how 
many words are there?’
ANSWER: ‘Dr. Rhys Davids estimated them at 1,752,800’ 
(filling forty-five printed volumes).
Which makes Ānanda’s claim doubly astonishing. 
For he was not even a Brahman; not even trained, that 
is, in reciting the Vedas by rote. Like his cousin Gotama, 
Ānanda was of the Khattiya (or Warrior) caste, as his 
transparent love for chariots and archery contests 
repeatedly betrays. Yet the implication (at face value) is 
that he had memorized at least five or more discourses 
a day over a period of forty-five years! Can that be 
possible? Can anyone really learn so much verbatim by 
heart? And what is the price of so relentlessly stuffing 
the mind?
Devout Muslims are capable of reciting the whole 
of the Koran. Burmese monks, to this day, learn to 
recite all five Nikāyas, with the disciplinary code (or 
Vinaya) thrown in. As Matthieu Ricard, a French monk 
in Nepal, recently attested: ‘Trained Easterners often 
have an astonishing memory. This isn’t just fiction. 
On numerous occasions I’ve myself heard Tibetan 
teachers, and students too, reciting texts several 
hundred pages long from memory, stopping from time 
to time to comment on the meaning, with an accuracy 
that always amazed me as I followed the text in a book.’3 
But Ānanda, apparently, could memorize a snatch of 
dialogue or impromptu debate after only one hearing. 
He could flawlessly repeat (it is said) discourses by the 
Buddha of up to 60,000 words – or 15,000 quatrains – in 
length without stumbling over a syllable.

402
THE BROKEN GONG
But the cost was high. Despite his honorific, 
‘Guardian of the Dhamma’, he remained the sole 
disciple (of seventy-five named ‘preeminent’) 
stubbornly unenlightened. Not that this seemed to 
prejudice his official standing. Asked by a layman 
how best to honour the Dhamma, the Buddha replied: 
‘Householder, go honour Ānanda, the Guardian of the 
Dhamma’; and just as Sāriputta was pronounced the 
‘Marshal of the Dhamma’ (Dhamma-sēnapati), so Ānanda 
was named its ‘Treasurer’, as if these were roles in its 
public administration. Nevertheless, Ānanda was the 
sole non-Arahant of the five hundred summoned to 
Rājagaha on the Buddha’s death, just barely managing 
to attain nibbāna, hours before the deadline, at the 
dawn of the opening of the First Great Council.
The scholarly, archivist side of Ānanda, then, must 
for decades have hampered and spiritually frustrated 
that decisive breakthrough. The story is told of five 
hundred monks who, on arrival, finding the Buddha 
in deep meditation, tacitly joined him in ‘motionless 
concentration’. At 10.00 p.m., Ānanda arose and, 
prostrating himself before the Buddha, urged: ‘Lord, 
the bhikkhus have long been seated. May the Exalted 
One exchange greetings with the new arrivals!’ No 
one stirred. At 2.00 a.m., he again tried bringing the 
meeting to a close; and again his attempt to extend the 
customary courtesies was foiled. Only at dawn, towards 
6.00 a.m., on his third attempt, did the Buddha finally 
emerge from meditation, saying:

403
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Ānanda, if only you knew, it wouldn’t occur to you to 
interrupt so often. If you too could reach the realms of 
supermundane experience, you would have realized that 
these five hundred bhikkhus and I – all of us sitting here in 
motionless concentration – had entered into imperturbable 
absorption, where words cannot penetrate.’4
But Ānanda did not yet ‘know’! Nor it seems, even 
then, had fully grasped the reproof: that the Buddha, 
all along conscious of his request (for his words, of 
course, had penetrated), simply resolved to ignore his 
insistent, intrusive social fuss.
*  *  *
For twenty-five years Ānanda served as the Buddha’s 
secretary and general factotum.5 That is from around c. 
508 BCE, when both turned fifty-five, to the Buddha’s 
death, when they were old men of eighty. Both 
physically and socially, Ānanda looked after him. We 
catch a glimpse of them at Sāvatthī, with the elderly 
Buddha ‘seated warming his back in the evening sun’ 
and Ānanda ‘massaging his limbs’, while clucking over 
his blotched and wrinkled skin, his now stooped, slackmuscled back.6
Yet he could be both diplomatic and decisive. He 
negotiated his own contract of employment on the 
most stringent terms: 1. that the Buddha never pass on 
to him a fine robe; 2. nor choice morsel of food; 3. nor 
include him on an invited alms-round; 4. nor offer him 
lodging in his own kuti or cell; 5. while permitting him

404
THE BROKEN GONG
to accept formal invitations on the Buddha’s behalf; 6. 
to introduce all visitors into his presence; especially 7. 
granting him the right ‘to question, when puzzled, the 
exact meaning’ of any aspect of the Buddha’s teaching; 
8. and above all to have whatever was ‘taught in his 
absence’ privately repeated and confirmed. What this 
amounted to, in a nutshell, was Ānanda’s insistence 
that his role should not be seen to entail the least 
hint of favouritism, even while he – and he alone 
– controlled all access to the Exalted One. What he 
clearly most valued were his own privileged audiences 
as confidential file-clerk and secretary, insisting that 
if he couldn’t explain the Dhamma and its categories, 
they would mock him: ‘Friend, don’t you catch on? 
Even though you follow him like his shadow?’ 7 He was 
wily enough, that is, not only to anticipate criticism but 
to fend off all mutterings well in advance.
But his most obvious characteristic was a relaxed 
and tender-hearted charm. His very name means 
‘joy’. As King Pasenadi of Kosala remarked: ‘Truly, he 
looks like Ānanda!’ His sense of self-identification with 
others was so intimate, so close, that when the Buddha 
was disabled by racking pain, he confessed feeling as 
if his body too ‘sagged like a creeper; everything grew 
dim and my senses faltered’.8 This may be a stereotyped 
phrase (used again on the occasion of the death of 
Sāriputta), but it reveals the sensitive, vulnerable 
side of the man. 9 An anxious dependence, an almost 
child-like need for approval, marked his relationship 
with his cousin. ‘Venerable sir,’ he chunters on, ‘was

405
HAROLD BEAVER
this well heard by me, well followed, well grasped 
and well remembered?’ to be patted on the head 
like a prize schoolboy: ‘Certainly, Ānanda, that was 
well heard by you, well followed, well grasped and
well remembered.’10
Even at eighty, predictably, his master’s demise 
proved altogether disabling. On learning the Buddha’s 
instruction for his funeral, Ānanda dodged into his 
lodging and, sobbing against the doorpost, burst out: 
‘I’m still a mere novice, alas, with such a long way to 
go! And my teacher who’s so compassionate towards 
me, my teacher is passing away!’ 11 But the Buddha, 
supportive to the end, bequeathed him this heartfelt 
testimonial: ‘Ānanda, you have long lavished on the 
Tathāgata the most intimate services, at all times 
consistently and unreservedly helpful and devoted 
and cheerful in word and deed. You have made much
merit, Ānanda.’12
His sunny, sympathetic temperament made him 
particularly popular with women, especially the 
nuns. In fact, he was instrumental in founding the 
nuns’ order; and it was he who interceded on behalf 
of Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī (the Buddha’s stepmother and 
aunt) at the gate of the monastery at Vēsālī, pressing 
her claims as Siddhattha’s wet-nurse who had ‘suckled 
the Exalted One with her milk when his own mother 
died’.13 But a charge, persistently brought, was his 
tendency to ignore the risks of mutual attachment. Once 
Ānanda invited Mahā Kassapa to accompany him to a 
nunnery for a teaching session there. After some slight

406
THE BROKEN GONG
hesitation, Mahā Kassapa agreed. Once his discourse 
was finally concluded, however, an obstreperous nun 
accused him of hogging the limelight and not letting 
the wise Ānanda utter a single word. It was, she said, 
as if a needle salesman had tried to sell his wares in the 
presence of a manufacturer of needles. Ānanda pleaded 
with Mahā Kassapa to forgive her. But the venerable 
elder was not so easily cajoled, warning that an enquiry 
might have to be set up into Ānanda’s overindulgence 
of women.
His social skills were exercised in all sorts of other 
ingenious ways, such as instituting sewing circles 
for patching and hemming robes (dismissed by the 
Buddha as too gregarious) 15 or organizing group tours 
for younger monks (condemned as subversive by Mahā 
Kassapa).16 But it was as a teacher that he was most in 
demand. ‘Ānanda possesses four remarkable qualities,’ 
the Buddha confirmed. ‘Whatever his audience – 
whether monks in assembly or nuns, whether laymen or 
laywomen – each and every group is always overjoyed 
to see him: delighted when he teaches Dhamma and 
ravenous for more when he falls silent.’17
Such a vast range of communal activities, of course, 
took their toll, constantly distracting him from his 
own needs and leaving scant time for meditation. 
But they were as nothing to the principal task which 
he set himself: the preservation of every word that 
passed the Buddha’s lips. Imagine the incessant strain 
of exercising total recall! He aimed at literally turning 
himself into a kind of animated xerox or photocopying

407
HAROLD BEAVER
machine. Apart from the daily filing of discourses and 
exchanges, moreover, he consciously played the role 
of Boswell to the Buddha’s Johnson, or Eckermann to 
his Goethe, by deliberately initiating conversations and 
eliciting responses with a seemingly spontaneous flow 
of queries: ‘Can a fragrance travel against the wind?’ 
‘How do monks achieve happiness in the Buddhist 
order?’ ‘What is the purpose of virtue? What are the 
blessings of a clear conscience?’ 18 Which needed 
constant, nimble fielding, though so patently planted. 
No, friendship was not half of the holy life. (It was the 
whole of it.)19 No, the doctrine of dependent origination 
(paṭicca-samuppāda) was very far from self-evident. (It 
was of immense profundity.)20
But Ānanda pushed on regardless: ‘Sir, wouldn’t it 
be helpful if this speech were explained? Hearing an 
explication from the Lord, the monks might better 
master it.’ Whereupon the Buddha, as like as not, would 
dig in his heels: ‘Ānanda, disciples should never follow 
a teacher just to hear an explication (veyyākarana ) 
of discourses in prose (suttas ) or in prose and verse 
(geyyas).’21 This watchdog of his was far too keen on 
snuffling out authorized commentaries and bona fide 
hermeneutics. He wanted everything on record. 22 He 
wanted the Sangha to retain every salvageable scrap, 
transforming doctrinal accumulation into an overriding 
mission. But the Buddha explicitly favoured intuitive 
wisdom and independent moral judgement over 
pedagogic prowess. 23 Despite seeming to collaborate, 
then, he must sometimes have simply been playing

408
THE BROKEN GONG
along, at bottom averse to the repetitive drills inherent 
in mere commentary and exposition.
According to the Aṅguttara Nikāya, Ānanda excelled in 
five capacities: 1. he was preeminent among those who 
had ‘heard much’; 2. among those who had a retentive 
memory; 3. among those who had mastered the 
sequential order; 4. among those who were energetic; 
5. and among those who attended on the Master. 24 
In other words, he absorbed without resistance or 
distortion; retained mindfully; perceived the internal 
coherence of a discourse (gatimanta) which dictated its 
meaning and implications; while remaining the perfect 
attendant with unflagging devotion to his task of 
memorizing and recitation. In the moonlit, blossoming 
enchantment of the Gosinga Sāla-tree Forest, his reply 
to Sāriputta’s challenge (to evoke a monk worthy 
of its beauty) paints what is in effect his own selfportrait: ‘Having heard much and remembered much,’ 
he opens, ‘a monk consolidates what he has learnt ... 
with the right phrasing ...’ That is, he emphasizes the 
overriding need for an exact, rhythmic recall. Expanding 
on this summary, he continues: ‘Having examined it 
and speculated on it and compacted it in the mouth, he 
teaches the Dhamma with ready, well-rounded phrases 
unhesitatingly to the assemblies ...’25
His own explanation for such virtuoso mnemonic 
retrieval, then, was above all musical; it was his 
rhetorical feel (‘right phrasing’, ‘by word of mouth’, 
‘with ready, well-rounded phrases’) which enabled him 
permanently to tap into his archive (when prompted)

409
HAROLD BEAVER
by listening for the ‘playback’ of whatever ‘track’ had 
once been ‘consolidated’. It was his ears which, by 
persistent training, had become abnormally retentive.
*  *  *
Nor was he alone. He was singled out and co-opted, 
rather. After forty-five years, many elderly bhikkhus 
survived, ‘expert in the traditions, memorizers of the 
Discipline (Vinaya) as well as the Codes’. 26 So many, in 
fact, that sometimes their heads had to be knocked 
together to resolve disputes. As at Kosambi, where 
there was a disagreement about some rinsing water 
inadvertently left in the latrines. This quarrel, egged 
on by various interested parties, blew so far out of 
proportion that the ‘master of the suttas’ (‘an expert on 
the Dhamma and the Vinaya’) was formally suspended 
and the Buddha in the end had to come over personally 
to sort things out.27
Even as a professional, then, Ānanda was far from 
unique. To ‘memorize’ was recommended to every 
truth-seeker, as the Buddha explained to a sixteenyear-old Brahman student: ‘Having heard the Dhamma, 
memorize it; investigate the meaning of dhammas 
memorized; and, when investigating their meaning, 
ponder them …’ 28 All in all, the Buddha acknowledged 
four principal authorities as earwitnesses after his 
death. Anyone claiming, ‘This is the Dhamma, this is 
the Discipline, this is the Master’s teaching’, must 
have heard and remembered it either directly from the

410
THE BROKEN GONG
Buddha’s own lips; or from a sangha of theras (elders) 
with an abbot; or from a community of theras who are 
expert memorizers; or from a single such thera who is 
an expert memorizer. In every case, the Buddha warned 
that such a monk’s statement ‘should be neither 
approved nor disapproved’, but checked against the 
public record, ‘carefully studying the sentences word 
for word to see if they can be traced to the suttas and 
confirmed by the Vinaya’.
The public record was thus to be the ultimate 
authority; and Ānanda was its guarantor: ‘If they are 
not found to be verified in the Vinaya or confirmed 
in the suttas,’ the Buddha continued, ‘it should be 
inferred: “These cannot be the Blessed One’s words; 
they have been wrongly understood by that monk, 
or that community, or those elders,” and should be 
rejected accordingly.’ 29 Thus the implacable burden 
placed on Ānanda’s shoulders.
But was this safety net (for verification procedures) 
already in place during the Buddha’s lifetime? It may 
have been. But the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta is more likely 
to have been proleptic in anticipating later tried-andtested procedures. For tradition holds that it was the 
First Great Council (of c. 483 BCE), when five hundred 
Arahants convened in a cave near Rājagaha, three 
months after the Buddha’s death, which decided to 
authenticate a definitive anthology of the Buddha’s 
teachings: the suttas being recited by Ānanda; the 
227 disciplinary regulations (Vinaya ) by the ex-barber 
Upāli; while the Sangha’s newly elected head, Mahā

411
HAROLD BEAVER
Kassapa, himself traced their distinctive metaphysical 
implications (later collected in the Abhidhamma, or 
‘Higher Dhamma’). Be that as it may, it was surely at 
this council that some sort of systematic recitation was 
attempted, as follows:
MAHĀ KASSAPA: ‘If the Sangha agrees, I shall now 
interrogate Ānanda on the Dhamma ... Friend, where was 
the Brahmājala Sutta spoken?’
ĀNANDA: ‘Between Rājagaha and Nālandā, Lord, in the 
King’s rest-house at Ambalaṭṭhikā.’
MAHĀ KASSAPA: ‘On whose account?’
ĀNANDA: ‘On account of the wanderer Suppiya and the 
Brahman student Brahmadatta.’30
– continuing with further cross-questioning about the 
source (or occasion) of the sutta and the character of 
the interlocutors. Moreover, rules must have been 
drawn up to govern the acceptance or rejection of 
any given item; a division of labour, among separate 
monastic communities, established to memorize the 
overlapping collections (Nikāyas ); their preservation 
by constant recitation – perhaps even the chanting 
of versified sections – encouraged; and finally their 
formulaic structure agreed upon. 31 That is, each 
discourse was prefaced ‘Thus [have] I heard’ (evaṃ 
me sutaṃ ) before proceeding to fix the geographic 
and dramatic coordinates, as it were, with an account 
of the setting of the discourse, its circumstances and 
addressees. For ‘where’ and ‘why’ determined the 
literary axes, never the chronological ‘when’. (Which

412
THE BROKEN GONG
makes any biographical approach to the Buddha’s 
doctrinal development, if any, after enlightenment so 
peculiarly complex.)
*  *  *
To comprehend this project, certain distinctions 
have to be drawn. Such bravura performances cannot 
be linked to theatrical feats of today. Monks were 
not actors being drilled into their parts. They had 
no scripts. Though accuracy, especially in poetic 
contexts, was clearly valued. The last two books of 
the Sutta Nipāta  may be set-pieces of this kind since 
the Udāna records a recital of the Aṭṭhaka-vagga, by 
Sona Thera; and the Aṅguttara Nikāya, of the Pārāyaṇavagga by the laywoman (upāsikā) Nandamātā. So public 
performances of verse with an archaic flavour were 
popular even then with monks as well as laity.
Nor can the suttas be remotely compared with the 
(so-called) Analects of Confucius, though both consist of 
a master’s sayings passed on by word of mouth from 
one generation to the next. 32 In China, the original 
homilies were excerpted, or abbreviated, or abstracted 
and partially edited with additional commentary, 
until almost none of the 512 sections that make up its 
twenty chapters contain more than a sentence or two – 
a short paragraph at most – so that the effect in print is 
more like a dictionary of quotations or a commonplace 
book with a variety of glosses and notes. More like the 
Dhammapada, in fact.

413
HAROLD BEAVER
 Can suttas, though, be compared to heroic lays? Did 
monks choose a sutta from their oral repertoire much 
as Demodokos among the Phaeacians chose the lay of 
the quarrel between Achilles and Odysseus, or of the 
cuckold Hephaistos outwitting Ares and Aphrodite, 
or (on demand) of the wooden horse at Troy, to sing 
in the palace of Alkinoös? 33 Certainly monks, like 
bards, transmitted their texts within a structure of set 
formulas employing similar techniques of expansion 
and distillation. Certainly bards, like monks, shaped 
their songs by a sequence of mnemonic tags hung on 
a scaffolding of standard themes (the Assembly, the 
Banquet, the Battle, the Journey) as was demonstrated 
by the pioneering work of Milman Parry and Albert 
Lord on Yugoslav and ancient Greek epic.34
This parallel, therefore, seems nearer the mark, as 
long as the ‘singer’ (ἀοιδός), who created the poem 
in the act of chanting, is sharply differentiated from 
the ‘rhapsode’ (ῥαψω ̜ δός), who is able to reproduce, 
on demand, the creations of a ‘singer’: the one being a 
master of composition (however traditional his devices 
and material), the other controlling a prodigious 
memory (whatever slight variations he plays on an 
established text). 35 For the Buddha and Ānanda, too, 
filled complementary roles. It was the Buddha who 
created the suttas spontaneously in performance; 
while Ānanda, rhapsode-like, took possession of the 
impromptu text.36 His function, in today’s jargon, was 
limited to ‘record’ and ‘playback’. Not that this implies 
a mere mindless automatism. Ānanda, too, needed

414
THE BROKEN GONG
to master the relevant formulas and compositional 
techniques. But only as aids to memorization. As he 
himself put it in the Theragāthā:
‘Knowing what comes first and later, 
Testing overall cohesion,
Skilled in grammar and persuasion, 
He investigates the context.
Keen in patient application,
He strives to weigh the meaning well. 
Punctually he makes the effort
And inwardly collects his mind.’37
The skills involved in constructing a précis, or 
performing as an actor, or improvising as a poet, or 
singing as a minstrel, or transmitting a devotional text 
– though clearly related – differ as widely as the Buddha 
differs from Homer, or Homer from Ānanda, or Ānanda 
from a Shakespearean player. Yet the Homeric text, 
as we have it, combines the techniques of the singercreator and rhapsode-performer just as our Buddhist 
texts derive in part from extempore utterance, in part 
from monastic tradition; and of each it can be said:
‘Punctually he makes the effort 
And inwardly collects his mind.’
For, finally, far more than memory training was 
at stake. It was the mind, or mindfulness: sati, in Pali, 
with its suggestion of self-discipline and self-control. 
The animated xerox metaphor, at best, was wholly 
inadequate to indicate this power of mastery over 
recollections and ideas. The orderly memory retains 
the sequential structure of words, of sentences,

415
HAROLD BEAVER
of rhythms, of ideas. Some variations – elisions, 
expansions, repetitions – were bound to creep in. But 
the four analytical discriminations (paṭisambhidās ) 
were attained in total mental absorption.
*  *  *
All Arahants, by definition, were:
‘Skilful in the ways of language, 
Grasping the structure of signs and 
Their meaningful combinations.’38
But only the Paṭisambhidapatto* attained the full 
‘fourfold analytical discrimination’. ‘What, great King, 
is the Jewel of the Analytical Powers proclaimed by 
the Exalted One?’ asked Nāgasena, supplying his own 
answer: ‘Four in number, great King, are the Analytical 
Powers: Understanding of the Meaning of Words; 
Understanding of the Doctrine; Grammar and Exegesis; 
and Readiness in Speaking.’39 That is,
Nirutti, roughly ‘grammar’: a skill in etymological 
analysis and current linguistic usage, including the 
parsing and declension of individual words;40
Aṭṭha, roughly ‘meaning’: the skilful development of 
what the Buddha expounded in brief by discerning its 
likely effect on particular listeners (according to their 
temperament and IQ);
Dhamma, here roughly ‘text’: the skilful distillation 
of what the Buddha expounded at length – by extracting 
* A ‘Paṭisambhidapatto’ is one who uses discriminative analysis. (Ed.)

416
THE BROKEN GONG
its essence – from an intuition of the past causes of 
present kamma in listeners’ lives;
Paṭibhāṇa, roughly ‘rhetoric’: the skilful deployment 
of nirutti, aṭṭha and dhamma by eloquence in exposition 
and a ready wit.
It is as if the Paṭisambhidapatto had seen through 
language, deconstructing its constituent signs, as 
he had dissolved all other (seemingly absolute) 
sensory and mental phenomena, while triumphantly 
manipulating and co-ordinating their potential 
meanings.41 Put another way: there are words; there 
are messages; there are meanings which may shift in 
pitch and determinacy between a sender’s intention 
and his listener’s reception. Of this whole complex 
interchange an Arahant becomes master. Having 
‘gone to the Unconditioned’, that is, he has grown 
luminously aware of all that conditions signs: conscious 
(as Saussure was to demonstrate) that all signs are 
inherently vacant, being the product of a haphazard 
code, or network, which is the ground of their potential 
acts of transmission.42
In the Aṅguttara Nikāya,  the Buddha praises Mahā 
Koṭṭhita as being the ‘foremost of the Paṭisambhidapatto 
Arahant bhikkhus’. Yet, oddly enough, in the Theragāthā 
only a single verse is ascribed to him; and on the dozen 
occasions when he appears in the suttas, it is always 
Mahā Koṭṭhita who is posing the questions!43
*  *  *

417
HAROLD BEAVER
For it was the Buddha, of course, who was the 
supreme Paṭisambhidapatto. Brahman grammarians 
(vaiyākaraṇas), by his time, had acquired the status of 
what we should call ‘literary critics’ today by switching 
to the largely extra-grammatical concerns of textual 
analysis and paraphrase; and, in so doing, had promptly 
split into two rival schools: one considering the text 
indivisible, based on a complex of propositions (vākya) 
as a whole, known as vākyavādin; the other considering 
the text divisible into terms and phrases (pada ), 
viewed as fundamental units of expression, known as 
padavādin.44 The Brahmajāla Sutta, for example, may well 
have taken a leaf out of the Brahmans’ own book with 
its hairsplitting classification of current philosophical 
theories into sixty-two varieties of ‘wrong views’; for 
the Buddha, as literary critic, clearly sided with the 
‘indivisible school’, primarily considering the meaning 
of propositions as a whole, despite having a special 
fondness for the term ‘pada’. On at least five occasions, 
he turned to analytical commentary, explicating verses 
from the much-loved Aṭṭhaka-vagga and Pārāyaṇa-vagga, 
even then renowned for their tricky verbal cruces and 
archaic usages.
But if the Buddha occasionally gave a lead, it was 
Sāriputta who became the Sangha’s key explicator, 
commentator and interpreter. His linguistic and 
hermeneutical skills were unreservedly commended by 
the Buddha: ‘You, Sāriputta, rightly succeed in turning 
the Unsurpassed Wheel of Dhamma turned by me’. 45 
That is why the Buddha pronounced him Dhamma-

418
THE BROKEN GONG
senāpati, or ‘Marshal of the Dhamma’. For his role and 
that of Ānanda were matched. If the ‘Treasurer’ trained 
himself to safeguard the Buddha’s every utterance, it 
was for the ‘Marshal’ systematically to edit and collate 
them. For which, it was said, he cultivated eight 
distinctive traits: being one who had heard DhammaVinaya and who caused others to listen; one who was 
learned in Dhamma-Vinaya and who caused others to 
learn; one who himself understood Dhamma-Vinaya 
and who caused others to understand; one skilled 
in unravelling what was compatible from what was 
incompatible; and no fomenter of disputes.46
Teaching for Sāriputta was no pedantic exercise, 
but a vital transaction based on his own most inward 
experience. Persistently, he classified such experience 
on rising from meditation, re-examining every stage 
of consciousness and sorting out its chief ingredients. 
He analysed each jhāna (absorption) in turn to the 
vanishing-point of perception and feeling. 47 It was on 
painstaking introspection, then, that his instruction 
depended, revealing him a master of the four 
paṭisambhidās. Of all the theras, to him are ascribed 
quite the largest number of discourses and explanatory 
interventions in the whole Tipiṭaka.
*  *  *
Apart from the (already noted) ‘Greater Discourse 
on Explanations’ and the probe into the ‘Limits of the 
Explainable’, both the Niddesa and Paṭisambhidā Suttas

419
HAROLD BEAVER
were ascribed to Sāriputta; the first, the sole work of 
an exclusively exegetical character in the Tipiṭaka; the 
second, a meticulous calculation totting up seventytwo distinct types of right and wrong speculative views 
(diṭṭhi).48 He further made legendary contributions 
to the Abhidhamma.49 As one ancient commentator 
confirmed: ‘The textual order of the Abhidhamma 
originated with Sāriputta; the subdivisions of the 
Great Book (Paṭṭhāna ) were also determined by him. 
Without distortion or bias, it can be said, he instituted 
the numbered sequence to facilitate learning, studying 
and teaching the Dhamma.’50 So it seems that Sāriputta 
both classified the Abhidhamma and settled its order 
of recitation (vacana-magga ), as well as devising the 
numerical sectioning (gaṇanacāra) of the Paṭṭhāna.
The same analytical rigour and exact methodology 
– the same mathematical elegance – were conspicuous 
in his own teaching, especially in his compilation 
of Dhamma terms. 51 The Sangīti Sutta (Doctrinal 
Recitation) preached on the death of the Jain master, 
Mahāvīra, received the Buddha’s express approval for 
its warning against dissension and schism (then rife in 
the Jain camp). In the Dasuttara Sutta (Tenfold Series 
Discourse), such terms were classified into groups of 
ten (sangīti ), further subdivided by ten, to highlight 
their precise practical consequences (dasuttara ): what 
was of key importance; what should be developed, 
or explored, or abandoned; what implied progress or 
regress; what was hard to penetrate; what needed to be 
personally sustained, experienced and realized. If not a

420
THE BROKEN GONG
creed (in the Christian sense) exactly, this classification 
aimed at tabulating and indexing the Dhamma on an 
encyclopaedic scale. What Sāriputta contributed, in a 
word, was not so much original thought as profound, 
logical insight. The sheer lucidity of his numerical 
apparatus (reminiscent of Dante’s or Wittgenstein’s 
systematic structures) for centuries after guaranteed 
harmony in the Sangha.
*  *  *
It was while standing at the Buddha’s back fanning 
him and following his discourse to the wanderer 
Dīghanakha, that Sāriputta claimed to have become 
a Paṭisambhidapatto. ‘A monk who is liberated,’ the 
Buddha summed up, ‘sides with none, disputes with 
none and can confidently converse in everyday 
colloquial speech.’ What Sāriputta glimpsed was the 
need for direct, personal participation and perception. 
An insight possessed him: ‘The Blessed One speaks of 
abandoning all mental states, having once examined 
and exposed them’; and in that flash ‘his mind was 
liberated’.52 As he later recalled:
‘It was half a month after my ordination, friends, that I 
grasped, to their minutest detail, the analytical knowledge 
of language (nirutti), the analytical knowledge of meaning 
(aṭṭha), the analytical knowledge of the text (dhamma) 
and the analytical knowledge of rhetoric (paṭibhāna). 
These I’ve since expounded in many ways, taught and 
propagated, explained and clarified. If anyone still

421
HAROLD BEAVER
entertains any uncertainties on this score, I shall be glad 
to enlighten him.’53
It was as if listening to the Buddha, and personally 
checking the discourse against his own experience, 
that Sāriputta simultaneously leapt to a spiritual 
and textual illumination. Leapt because the instant 
of perception was, by definition, devoid of any 
hint of self-aggrandizement. On another occasion, 
privately sharing a trance experience with Ānanda, 
he emphasized: ‘No thoughts struck me such as “I’m 
entering the jhāna! I’ve entered it! I’m rising from it!”.’54
The key to Sāriputta’s achievement was this 
coupling of absolute detachment and self-control, 
or (put another way) of absolute self-control and 
detachment. The two were as intimately linked as the 
radiance of his person and the lucidity of his thought. 
For all were grounded in his continuous absorption 
in suññatā-vihāra (‘abiding in voidness’). Even the 
Buddha, noticing Sāriputta’s dazzling features, once 
enquired after the cause. 55 Unlike Ānanda, that is, he 
was never absorbed by discourse – never impressed by 
the linguistic medium as an end in itself – being wholly 
absorbed (as he put it) in the awareness of ‘Nibbāna as 
the quenching of existence’ (bhava-nirodho). 56 Yet, like 
the Buddha, he was exceptionally fluent in exposition, 
able to debate for days on end, as the Buddha
himself testified:
‘The essence of the Dhamma (dhammadhātu) has been 
so well penetrated by Sāriputta, bhikkhus, that if I were to

422
THE BROKEN GONG
question him for one day in different words and phrases, 
Sāriputta would likewise reply for one day in different 
words and phrases; or if I were to question him for one 
night, or a day and a night, or two days and two nights, 
or as long as seven days and nights even, Sāriputta would 
still expound the matter for the same space in different 
words and phrases.’57
In his grief at Sāriputta’s death, Ānanda lamented:
‘How obliging he always was to his brothers in the holy 
life – advising, informing, instructing, urging, rousing and 
encouraging us! How tireless he was in proclaiming the 
Dhamma! Who can’t recall how the Venerable Sāriputta 
nourished and enriched and helped him with the 
Dhamma?’58
As the disciple of a teacher who left not one word on 
paper, Sāriputta resembles Plato. In some respects, also 
St. Paul. Except that Sāriputta left nothing on paper 
either. Akin to the Greek and the Jew – philosopher and 
proselytizer – however, he evolved (like them) into a 
‘system-building successor’ who turned his master’s 
utterances into a proliferating ‘structure of thought, 
soon hardening into dogma’.59
Those vast schematizations of his (like theirs), 
then, needed close watching. But Ānanda’s role was 
altogether different. A ‘rhapsode’, in epic terms, he 
became the performer of his master’s impromptu 
utterances. Illiterate as the Buddha (so far as we know), 
he would never have presumed to distort his master’s 
legacy, except for mnemonic purposes. Why scratch

423
HAROLD BEAVER
our heads, then, trying to unravel the contributions of 
one from the other? Oral transmission may well prove 
less hazardous than scribal emendation, or critical 
elaboration, or literary misinterpretation of a written 
text. The very oddity (for us) of classifying suttas 
into categories such as ‘duration-in-performance’ 
or ‘numerological features’ itself seems to verify the 
authenticity of their oral content. So that I, for one, feel 
unambiguously closer to the Buddha of the suttas than 
I have ever felt (as reader) to the Galilean Jesus of the 
Four Gospels, let alone to the Christ of Paul’s Epistles, 
or to the multifaceted and ironized Socrates of the 
Platonic dialogues.
Sāriputta, as we saw, was a self-declared 
Paṭisambhidapatto. But Ānanda was neither declared 
nor described as a Paṭisambhidapatto. Rightly so, 
since he did not attain enlightenment until after the 
Buddha’s death. Still remote – still a mirage – lay the 
most vexed, most tantalizing goal: a total voidness 
beyond names and concepts. He had not yet reached 
that ‘imperturbable absorption where words cannot 
penetrate’.60 Which, in the long run, surely proved to 
our advantage. As his skimped meditation practice 
turned out to our advantage. Just as his attachment 
to the extrinsic properties of verbal signs accrued 
to our quite exceptional advantage. Since the effort 
of mastering them inexorably entailed his mastery 
by them. As the Buddha’s exemplary attendant, he 
inevitably remained at the service of language. That

424
THE BROKEN GONG
was the scholar’s price he willingly paid – until it was 
almost too late.
For one last time, the Buddha warned him of his 
increasingly dithering ways:
‘So, Ānanda, live as an island unto yourself: with yourself, 
and no other, as refuge; with the Dhamma, and no other, 
as island refuge.’61
And, who knows, that time it may have worked. 
Unless it was the shock of the Buddha’s loss. Only 
one thing is sure: to have been the verbal guardian 
of the Dhamma, while taking refuge in the Dhamma, 
had proved a contradiction in terms and a perpetual
stumbling-block.

Any writer on Buddhism faces a dilemma. It could 
be called the Buddhist catch-22. ‘Only because he is 
a puthujjana (unenlightened worldling)’, it will be 
deemed, ‘is he able to write; the truly enlightened 
neither write nor desire to write.’ In the Buddha’s
own words:
‘When muffled as a broken gong
You don’t reverberate, you’ve reached 
Nibbāna: self-aggrandizement 
Becalmed – and now extinct in you.’1
Or in Lao-tzu’s formulation: ‘Those who know, do 
not speak; those who speak, do not know.’ Or again: 
‘When you are silent, “it” speaks; when you speak, “it” 
is silent.’2
The intractable paradox of language, treated 
in the first chapter, again and again returned to 
* A version of this Epilogue, entitled ‘Language and Silence’, first 
appeared in Parnassus: Poetry in Review, vol. 18, nos. 2 and 19, no. 1 
(1993). Publisher and editor: Herbert Leibowitz, 205 West 89 th Street, 
apartment 8F, New York, NY 10024, USA. info@parnassus.com. (Ed.)

426
THE BROKEN GONG
haunt the Buddhist imagination. What the Buddha 
designated a ‘broken gong’ became the central crux – 
or ‘gateless gate’ in an apt oxymoron – on the path to 
enlightenment. ‘But tell me – does the sound come to 
the ear, or does the ear go to the sound?’ asked Wumen, the Zen master, in a teasing aside. ‘And if you 
have transcended sound and silence, what do you say 
at such a point?’3
 To confront that question I turn now to a single 
strand, more than one and a half millennia later, of the 
Buddhist tradition: the Chinese and Japanese attempt 
to escape the language trap by evolving an oblique, 
or lateral, style of discourse on the most abruptly 
challenging terms. Here, breaking the temporal 
constraints of this study, I too shall engage those
terms aslant.
*  *  *
A Roman once approached Epictetus with his son 
to hear him talk. So the philosopher lectured for a 
while and then stopped. ‘This’, he said, ‘is the method 
of teaching.’ When the other asked him to go on, he 
replied: ‘Every art seems tedious, when it is delivered to 
a person ignorant and unskilful in it.’4 We all know what 
he meant. It is an impasse, as every musician or writer 
or artist recognizes. Fats Waller summed up the matter 
most cogently in a put-down (sometimes attributed 
to Louis Armstrong) of a British lady, a Mrs. Crutchley 
visiting cousins in Leonia, New Jersey. ‘Mr. Waller’, she 
had asked, ‘what is swing?’ To which Waller replied:

427
HAROLD BEAVER
‘Look, lady, if you gotta ask, you ain’t got it.’ Or as Wumen, making a similar point, more tactfully advised: 
‘Don’t offer a poem unless you meet a poet.’5
For truth, as in the West Kierkegaard was the first 
to acknowledge, cannot be taught: truth not as a set of 
values, that is, but as ‘inward’ knowledge, something 
‘existential’ by which one is prepared to live. It follows 
that it must, by its very nature, be paradoxical and only 
a leap of some kind may induce the unexpected tumble 
into enlightenment. ‘Can someone else be a man’s 
teacher in this?’ Wittgenstein wondered in Philosophical 
Investigations. ‘Certainly. From time to time he gives him 
the right tip ... What one acquires here is not technique; 
one learns correct judgements.’6 That sounds very Zen; 
and he seems even more like a Zen master in 1949 at 
Cornell, when bemoaning to Oets Bouwsma that within 
professional philosophy his teaching had done more 
harm than good: ‘Do you understand?’ ‘Oh, yes. They 
had found a formula.’ ‘Exactly.’ As Hui-neng, the Sixth 
Patriarch of Chinese Ch’an Buddhism, had laid down 
centuries earlier: ‘Self-enlightenment and practice do 
not consist in argument.’
In the Mahayāna tradition of Tibet, they make a 
distinction between togpa (ratiocination) and togspa 
(understanding). As a lama in eastern Tibet once 
explained to Alexandra David-Neel:
‘Study [togpa] is of no use in gaining true knowledge 
[togspa]; it is rather an obstacle. All that we learn in that way 
is vain. In fact, one only knows one’s own ideas and one’s 
own visions. As for the real causes that have generated

428
THE BROKEN GONG
these ideas, they remain inaccessible to us. When we try 
to grasp them we only seize the ideas that we, ourselves, 
have elaborated about these causes.’7
All knowledge, in this analogy, is like language 
which may discriminate and articulate and categorize 
experience; it may even be claimed as a substitute for – 
or at least an equivalent to – experience; yet it can never 
itself replace experience. Just as a map cannot replace a 
territory; or the word ‘water’ is never itself drinkable. 
‘Fine words butter no parsnips’, runs an English 
proverb. Dependence on words is like trying to hit the 
moon with a stick (Wu-men warns), or scratching your 
shoes when your feet itch. As one young intellectual, 
Hsiang-yen, had to learn the hard way: ‘A cake drawn 
on paper can never satisfy hunger.’
Furthermore, as the lama implies, whatever is known 
(or named or delineated) by us is at once entangled in 
that very knowledge (or naming or delineation). This 
is precisely the teasing slippage in which so much of 
Wallace Stevens’s poetry is implicated. ‘We live in the 
description of a place’, he sighed in a letter, ‘and not 
in the place itself.’ Or in the Adagia: ‘Things seen are 
things as seen.’ Howard Nemerov, with comic brio, put 
it this way:
‘I may identify a certain tree by as many characteristics 
as the handbook affords me, but it will never up and say, 
“You guessed it. I am indeed a box elder” . What we know is 
never the object, but only our knowledge.’8
So when David-Neel one day asked her lama what

429
HAROLD BEAVER
was the Supreme Deliverance (tharpa ), he answered 
logically enough: ‘It is the absence of all views and 
all imagination, the cessation of that mental activity 
which creates illusions.’
*  *  *
Zen art never aspires to monumentality but rather, 
like footprints on sea-sand, embodies evanescence – 
the drift of mist, the flicker of shadow, the gleam of 
moonlight:
‘Bamboo shadows sweep the stairs 
But no dust is stirred. 
Moonlight reaches to the bottom of the pond 
But no trace is left in the water.’9
‘Wherever I walk’, wrote Hsiang-yen after his 
enlightenment, ‘no traces are left.’ Not even truth itself 
– the Dhamma – should be clung to. ‘The Dhamma is like 
a raft,’ the Buddha concluded, ‘designed for a particular, 
practical purpose, not for retention as an unwieldy 
keepsake.’10 This abandoning even of the Dhamma or 
unconditioned truth (as a concept) is, I repeat, one of 
the most astounding features of Buddhism. Language 
itself, as a system of abstractions and categorizations, 
must finally be abandoned for an aesthetic of silence, 
of emptiness, of absence. The Sixth Patriarch of Zen, 
an illiterate woodcutter, tore up the suttas to show his 
uncompromising preference for first-hand experience. 
Why ‘get involved with the tongue of a predecessor?’

430
THE BROKEN GONG
asks Wu-men. Why this infatuation for quotations? 
(Case 24). ‘What good is recording my words’, Yünmen mocked his students, ‘and tying up your tongues?’
‘Te-shan brought his notes on the Diamond Sutra before 
the Dharma Hall and held up a torch, saying, “Even though 
you have exhausted the abstruse doctrines, it is like 
placing a hair in vast space. Even though you have learned 
all the secrets of the world, it is like letting a single drop of 
water fall into an enormous valley.” And he burned up all 
his notes.’ (Case 28)
Ta-hui burned the printing-blocks of The Blue Cliff 
Record ‘because he observed that the enthusiasm for 
the beauty and eloquence of expression was hindering 
people from directly experiencing enlightenment on 
their own’.11
‘Words do not convey the fact; 
Language is not an expedient. 
Attached to words, your life is lost; 
Blocked by phrases, you are bewildered.’ (Case 37)
Zen delights in the pregnant phrase (‘just give 
me one phrase!’), yet will immediately repudiate 
that phrase: ‘No leaning on words and letters’; ‘point 
straight at man’s mind’. It’s like our first swimminglesson or learning to ride a bike. Each one of us must 
practise speaking or swimming or bicycling on our 
own. We must simultaneously both sink into the water 
and yet not sink; both delve into speech and not delve; 
both say and not say. 12 ‘If you open your mouth, you 
are lost. If you cannot speak, then it seems you are

431
HAROLD BEAVER
stumped’ (Case 25). ‘If you do not answer, you evade 
your responsibility. If you do answer, you lose your life’ 
(Case 5). Again and again, at the end of a kōan, Wu-men 
hustles the poor student into the same trap: ‘You cannot 
use words. You cannot not use words. Speak quickly! 
Speak quickly!’ (Case 43). The trick, a non-swimmer 
must think, is to breathe in a different way. The trick, 
the poor student must think, is to ‘say something with 
your lips and throat closed.’ For the ultimate ideal is to 
transcend both speech and silence; to reach a state of 
perception, beautifully suggested by Wallace Stevens 
in ‘The Creations of Sound’:
‘Tell X that speech is not dirty silence 
Clarified. It is silence made still dirtier.’
It all began with the great Bodhidharma, the bearded 
missionary who arrived from India at the court of the 
Chinese emperor in c. 520 CE. The emperor devoutly 
enquired: ‘What is the first principle of the holy 
teaching?’ ‘Vast emptiness, nothing holy’, came back 
the uncompromising reply. ‘Who is this confronting 
me?’ the startled emperor asked. ‘I don’t know’, 
Bodhidharma replied. The emperor was nonplussed, as 
well he might be. However profound the answers, they 
inaugurated a peculiarly monkish intransigence in the 
face of worldly power. From this initial encounter, it 
could be argued, springs the whole close-lipped, foxy 
tradition of Zen rhetoric. ‘Not knowing’, as one monk 
once remarked to another, ‘is most intimate.’ The socalled Four Principles of Bodhidharma (though not 
formulated by him) are:

432
THE BROKEN GONG
‘A special transmission outside the scriptures; 
No dependence on words or phrases;
Directly pointing to the human mind;
Seeing into one’s own nature and attaining Buddhahood.’13
Wu-men (Japanese: Mumon, 1183-1260) lived some 
four to five centuries after the T’ang masters whom 
he was annotating. His postscript is dated in the year 
1228, when he was age forty-five. His book consists of 
a compilation of forty-eight kōans to each of which 
he contributes a gnomic comment and appends an 
epigrammatic verse. It is thus a Sung commentary, by a 
master of the Lin-chi (Japanese Rinzai) school, devoted 
to classics of the golden age of Chinese Buddhism.
Yet it seems extravagant to call Wu-men’s sparse 
comments a commentary exactly. They create a kind 
of dialogue across the centuries, engaging with the 
original ‘Case’ in an edgy, crackling, indirect way. If 
anyone has mastered the art of speaking with ‘lips 
and throat closed’, it is surely Wu-men. He disdains to 
teach. He will introduce us personally to the Ancestral 
Teachers. Not merely introduce, but shove us face to 
face with them. He promises a forehead-to-forehead 
encounter in which the hair of our eyebrows will 
become entangled until we see with the same eyes, 
hear with the same ears. There is no escaping such a 
man. ‘For your sake,’ he writes, ‘I have removed the 
lid of my skull and bulged out my eyeballs. Please take 
hold of the matter directly, and do not preoccupy 
yourself otherwise.’ He employs all the shock tactics 
at his command. He’s abrupt, rude, scathing, pushy,

433
HAROLD BEAVER
teasing, wacky by turns. His is a most premeditated 
kind of spontaneity, like clouting your best friend who 
has hiccups on the back.
A good example of Zen shock therapy is Case 3. I 
shall first quote the whole case:
‘Whenever Chüh-chih was asked a question, he 
simply raised a finger. One day a visitor asked Chühchih’s attendant what his master preached. The boy 
raised a finger. Hearing of this, Chüh-chih cut off the 
boy’s finger with a knife. As he ran from the room, 
screaming with pain, Chüh-chih called to him. When 
he turned his head, Chüh-chih raised a finger. The boy 
was suddenly enlightened.
When Chüh-chih was about to die, he said to his 
assembled monks: “I received this one-finger Zen from 
T’ien-lung. I used it all my life but never used it up.” 
With this, he entered into his eternal rest.’
Why one finger? For a start, it’s available, visible 
and so skirts the pitfalls of language. It can be used as 
a warning talisman on every conceivable occasion. But 
used for what? To induce the direct perception of a 
single reality: not ‘this’ finger or ‘that’ finger; not ‘my’ 
finger or ‘your’ finger; not ‘have’ and ‘have not’; not ‘you 
do’ and ‘I don’t’; not ‘ignorance’ and ‘knowledge’; not 
‘attainment’ and ‘non-attainment’. Reason endlessly 
spawns such dualities. But
‘“The Way is not subject to knowing or not knowing. 
Knowing is delusion; not knowing is blankness. If you 
truly reach the genuine Way, you will find it as vast and

434
THE BROKEN GONG
boundless as outer space. How can this be discussed at 
the level of affirmation and negation?”
With these words, Chao-chou had sudden realization.’14
There is a comical incident in which two monks 
visit a house to pay their condolences. One rapped on 
the coffin and asked: ‘Living or dead?’ The other at 
once tumbled to his game and clammed up. ‘I won’t 
say living; I won’t say dead’, came the guarded reply. 
‘Why won’t you say?’ his wily friend insisted. But the 
other just kept on muttering obstinately: ‘I won’t say! 
I won’t say!’ 15 This suggests something of the scarcely 
veiled belligerence, the rapier-thrust quality, of Zen 
discourse. Quick as a flash the monk recognized the 
risks of knowing, while only too well aware that ‘not 
knowing is blankness’. So he blocked. He resolutely 
declined being caught out either way, in affirmation 
or negation, however dumb it made him look. Despite 
his quandary, he had to avoid both the evidence of his 
senses and the simplest modes of rational operation. 
Indeed, that was his quandary.
But then why did Chüh-chih cut off his servant’s 
finger? Hadn’t that boy well and truly learned his 
lesson? Couldn’t he raise just one finger? The answer 
is ‘no’. He had learned nothing. He was merely showing 
off. He was simply a mimic, a bit of a joker. What he had 
yet to learn, in Lin-chi’s words, was that:
‘Your mind is always running after the objects that present 
themselves and cannot restrain itself. An old teacher called 
this “seeking to place another head over your own” . If you

435
HAROLD BEAVER
turn your light within and reflect intimately there and stop 
seeking external things, you will realize that your own 
mind and those of the Buddhas and Founding Teachers 
do not differ from one another.’16
This ‘seeking to place another head over your own’ 
is really the Unpardonable Sin of Zen practice. A master 
once put it this way in addressing his assembly: ‘I have 
one matter to ask you about. If you say, “Yes, that’s 
right”, you are putting another head above your own. 
If you say, “No, that’s not right”, you are looking for 
life by cutting off your head.’17 The same old quandary! 
But now at least this much should be clear. Only when 
violently deprived of his own forefinger, could the boy 
experience the impact of his master’s one raised finger. 
Only then could he realize that it was ‘simply a matter 
of not choosing’ (in Chao-chou’s repeated phrase): 
neither this finger nor that finger. Slyness or jokiness in 
themselves can never be enough, as Wu-men remarks 
(Case 12): ‘If you still cling to understanding, you’re in 
trouble. If you try to imitate Jui-yen, your discernment 
is altogether that of a fox.’
Such violence may seem to us excessive. It may 
seem too high a price to pay for deconstructing our 
binary, verbal and rationalized self-consciousness. 
Yet this thinking against thinking, this need to float 
buoyantly upstream against the current, is Buddhism’s 
fundamental paradox. It is the very starting point of 
Wu-men’s commentary (Case 1): ‘if you do not cut off 
the mind road, then you are a ghost clinging to bushes 
and grasses.’ Chüh-chih was deliberately cutting off

436
THE BROKEN GONG
‘the mind road’ by amputating his attendant’s power 
of imitation.
Extreme shock therapy, if not commonplace, is not 
altogether uncommon in the Zen tradition. Take the 
extraordinary events of Case 14:
‘The priest Nan-chʼüan found monks of the eastern and 
western halls arguing about a cat. He held up the cat and 
said, “Listen, everyone! If you can say something, I will 
spare this cat. If you can’t say anything, I will cut off its 
head.” No one could say a word, so Nan-chʼüan cut the cat 
into two.
That evening, Chao-chou returned from outside and Nanchʼüan told him what happened. Chao-chou removed a 
sandal from his foot, put it on his head, and walked out.
Nan-chʼüan said, “If you had been there, the cat would 
have been spared.”’
Again a duality (either saying or not-saying) creates a 
logjam of expectations: ‘No one could say a word.’ The 
artist Sengai, in a drawing of this incident, showed Nanchʼüan holding the cat up in one hand and brandishing 
a knife with the other before two bewildered monks. 
Above he added the words:
‘Cut one, cut all – 
Why just the cat?’
It is not the wilful cruelty that should obsess us here. 
It is rather the madcap knockabout routines that Zen 
has to improvise to induce these mental somersaults at 
all. Since Zen cannot operate by argument, it must have 
recourse to a limited number of other devices. I make

437
HAROLD BEAVER
them some nine in number (though these categories 
are by no means exclusive), divided into two groups of 
non-verbal and verbal responses:
1. Non-verbal teaching by:
i. Physical abuse, shading into;
ii. Impromptu mime of all kinds, shading into; 
iii. Silence.
2. Verbal teaching by:
i. Onomatopoeic or nonsense syllables; 
ii. Carroll-like non-sequiturs;
iii. Paradoxical riddles, shading into;
iv. Seemingly illogical sets of exclusive contraries; 
v. Scatological metaphor;
vi. Topsy-turvy inversion, or a ‘via negative’.
Let me exemplify these techniques one by one.
1.i. Te-shan, whom we last met burning his notes on 
the Diamond Sutra, was notorious for fierce, physically 
abusive teaching. ‘If you speak, you get thirty blows,’ 
he would roar, laying about him with his staff. ‘If you 
do not speak, you get thirty blows.’ As one of his pupils 
remarked: ‘It was as though I were a bucket whose 
bottom suddenly dropped out.’ But Te-shan was not the 
only one to play the role of an irascible Mr. Punch; his 
Zen version of a Marx Brothers farce was not unique. 
Think of Chüh-chih chopping off his attendant’s finger. 
Crusty old Mu-chou, by slamming his gate, actually 
managed to break a visitor’s leg.
1.ii. As a young monk, Te-shan was the beneficiary 
of a rather gentler approach. Once visiting an older

438
THE BROKEN GONG
master, he continued his questioning far into the night. 
It grew so late that finally the old monk asked him to 
retire. Te-shan apologetically made his bows but, on 
lifting the blinds, was surprised to see how dark it had 
become and turned back.
‘It’s dark outside’, he said. The old monk lit a paper 
candle and was on the point of handing it over, and 
Te-shan was just reaching over to take it, when the 
old man blew it out. Startled by the extinction, ‘Teshan had sudden realization ...’ (Case 28). It was the 
extinction of light, paradoxically, that illuminated his 
transition from mere intellectual darkness to absolute 
and unblinkered darkness. It was a lesson Te-shan was 
never to forget.
Impromptu charades of this kind can take many 
mysterious forms. Return to the case of the cat. Chaochou, on hearing what had occurred in his absence, 
‘removed a sandal from his foot, put it on his head, and 
walked out’. What did this mean? Putting a sandal on 
the head was a sign of mourning in old China. Here it 
looks more like a sign of a world turned upside down, 
where Zen monks argue about what? The possession 
of a cat? The characteristics of a cat? Or whether a cat 
has Buddha nature or not? Chao-chou’s charade simply 
cuts through the cackle.
As does the monastic cook in Case 40. His abbot 
needed to choose a teacher for a new foundation:
‘He invited all his monks to make a presentation, saying, 
“The outstanding one will be sent.” Then he took a water 
bottle and set it on the floor, and said, “Don’t call this a

439
HAROLD BEAVER
water bottle. What would you call it?”
 The head monk said, “It can’t be called a wooden stump.”
The abbot then asked the cook for his opinion. The cook 
kicked over the water bottle and walked out.
The abbot laughed, saying, “The head monk loses.” The 
cook thereupon was made the founding teacher at Mount 
Ta-kuei.’
What was so special about the cook? Wasn’t it 
churlish of him to make off like that? Not at all. At 
one stroke he shattered the complication of the 
water bottle: its whole separate existence and what to 
call it. Nominalism? Realism? Just give it a kick. Like 
Alexander the Great confronting the Gordian Knot, the 
cook simply slices through the conundrum.
Often these scenes explode into violence. For Zen is 
poised permanently on the brink of an abyss, at the very 
edge of the precipice. No time here for mere dithering 
or contemplative chatter. Zen represents the radical, 
catastrophe-prone wing of Buddhism, continually 
consumed by its own nervous energy. As in this story 
of two young monks strolling under the full moon. One 
said: ‘Everybody could enjoy this, but they don’t use 
it.’ The other replied: ‘How true! Won’t you please use 
it?’ The first prevaricated: ‘How would you use it?’ The 
second seized him by the lapels of his robe, threw him 
to the ground and trampled on him. When the first had 
scrambled back on to his feet and dusted himself off, he 
said: ‘What a tiger you are!’
1.iii. From unspoken mime the next move inevitably 
leads to strategies of silence: the silence of a Buddha

440
THE BROKEN GONG
image; the silence of the teacher endlessly frustrating 
an anxious pupil. It is silence, above all, that speaks 
with ‘lips and throat closed’. Wu-men comments
(Case 27):
‘No-words truly have an effect;
Though the great ocean becomes a field, 
It cannot be communicated to you.’
2.i. By extension, ‘no-words’, of course, may also be 
taken to indicate natural sounds. These, too, may ‘truly 
have an effect’.
‘One tock! and knowledge is forgotten; 
What kind of sound is that?’
asked Sengai at the head of his drawing of a monk 
standing below a nodding bamboo shoot with a broom. 
That monk was Hsiang-yen (of the illusory cake) who, 
after his enlightenment, wrote this poem:
‘One tock! has made me forget all my previous knowledge. 
No artificial discipline is needed at all.
In every movement, I uphold the ancient Way 
And never fall into the rut of mere quietism. 
Wherever I walk, no traces are left,
And my senses are not fettered by rules of conduct.’
His story was this. A rather too studious and 
intellectually inturned young monk, he had been 
stymied by a famous kōan (attributed to the Sixth 
Patriarch) which had been set him: ‘Let me have your 
view as to your own being before your parents were 
born.’ Finally, burning all his notes in frustration, he

441
HAROLD BEAVER
applied for the job of caretaker at a much revered, 
ancestral tomb. There he built himself a hut and spent 
his days cleaning the grounds, absorbed in his kōan. 
One day, while sweeping leaves, his bamboo broom 
caught a small pebble which, flicked into the air, 
struck a stem of bamboo: tock! With that tock! he was 
enlightened. How? Why? One might well ask without 
expecting a rational answer. But, like the sound of an 
arrow striking its target, that tock! may have marked the 
moment when object and subject, matter and man in 
the act of perception, became one. It is rather, as Eugen 
Herrigel explained after years of practising Japanese 
archery, that through a kind of disciplined inattention, 
‘bow, arrow, goal and ego, all melt into one another, so 
that I can no longer separate them. And even the need 
to separate has gone.’18
Such was Hsiang-yen’s moment of enlightenment; 
and much the same might be said about another 
monosyllable, the kernel of what is possibly the 
most famous of all kōans and the opening case of
the Mumonkan:
‘A monk asked Chao-chou, “Has the dog Buddha nature 
or not?”
Chao-chou said, “Mu” .’
Here is not the place to go into this most elusive of 
syllables on which Zen acolytes may work for years. 
Wu-men himself worked hard on the kōan for six years. 
In everyday usage, Japanese Mu (Chinese Wu) means 
‘no’, ‘does not have’. But Wu-men specifically warns:

442
THE BROKEN GONG
‘Don’t consider it to be nothingn ess. Don’t think in 
terms of “has” and “has not”.’ For if you do, the answer 
is simply: ‘No. A dog does not have Buddha nature.’ So 
no Zen. Listen instead to what resonates around the 
connotation ‘empty’: literally, that is, a dog may seem 
empty of Buddha nature yet still have it in that very 
emptiness, as we humans realize our Buddha nature 
only in bailing, or emptying, ourselves out. The long 
open vowel pulses with ambiguities. Mu, not unlike 
tock!, operates by jamming reason, jamming mere talk, 
in an act of perception where ‘have’ and ‘have not’, 
subject and object, merge into one.
2.ii. How foolish, Wu-men had warned, ‘are those 
who depend upon words and seek understanding by 
their intellect!’ But, as a teacher himself, he cannot just 
sit there and mu.
His own language, when he attempts a gloss on this 
passage, bravely resorts to the hyperbole of folklore 
and the wit of Mother Goose: ‘They try to hit the moon 
with a stick. They scratch their shoes when their feet 
itch.’ A touch of childish grotesque and burlesque, 
reminiscent of Lewis Carroll and Edward Lear, affects a 
number of these anecdotes. Take this scene:
‘Passing by the bathroom, Nan-chʼüan saw the monk 
in charge of heating the bath and asked, “What are you 
doing?”
The monk said, “Heating the bath.”
Nan-chʼüan said, “Don’t forget to call the cow for its bath.”
That evening, the monk came to Nan-chʼüan’s room. Nanchʼüan asked, “What are you doing here?”
The monk said, “I’m here to tell the cow the bath is ready.”
Nan-chʼüan asked, “Did you bring the reins?”’19

443
HAROLD BEAVER
2.iii. Such illogical logic is transformed readily into 
paradoxical riddles, of which Case 20 is just one of 
countless examples:
‘The priest Sung-yüan asked, “Why can’t the person of 
great strength lift up a leg?” Again he said, “It is not with 
the tongue that you speak.”’
On which Wu-men sarcastically comments: ‘Lifting my 
leg, I kick the Scented Ocean upside down.’
2.iv. Paradoxical riddles, in their turn, shade into 
nonsensical-sounding, self-cancelling propositions, as 
seen in Case 44:
‘The priest Pa-chiao said to his assembly: “If you have a 
staff, I shall give you a staff. If you have no staff, I shall take 
a staff from you.”’
Pa-chiao (Japanese Basho) was a Korean monk 
who had settled in China. The staff, which he used to 
dramatize his point, was that which every Zen master 
carries; about seven feet long, it is the outward token 
of his status. But what was the point exactly? Another 
variant on mu, I think, but now reenacted as a spiritual 
transaction common to all higher religions. For 
‘salvation’ (or in this case ‘enlightenment’) can never 
be spelled out in the binary terminology of ‘have’ and 
‘have not’. As Jesus put it: ‘Unto every one which hath 
shall be given; and from him that hath not, even that 
he hath shall be taken away from him’ (Luke 19:26). 
And even this proposition can be inverted, as Ta-wei
Mu-ch’i attested:

444
THE BROKEN GONG
‘As for myself, I differ from him. When you have a staff, I 
shall take it away from you; and when you have none, I 
shall give you one.’
That inversion, too, Jesus could accommodate: ‘He that 
findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his life 
for my sake shall find it’ (Matthew 10:37). For here Zen 
and Christianity converge to a single vanishing-point. 
It is paradoxical devices such as these, rather than 
their precise formulation, which constitute a password 
through the Gateless Gate.
2.v. In all this there is an element of shock. But the 
ultimate shocker, in a transcendental context, is the 
toilet: not the duality of copulation, but the privacy of 
excretion; not sex, but shit. The pithiest exchange in 
the whole Mumonkan must be that of Case 21:
MONK: ‘What is Buddha?’ 
YÜN-MEN: ‘Dried shitstick.’
In other words, ‘a shit-scraper’. I remember hearing 
Buddhadāsa at Suan Mokkh, in southern Thailand, say, 
‘Even if there is a little bhava [becoming, existence], 
there will be a stink’, and was struck by the folksy 
colloquialism. It was only later that I came across this 
passage in the suttas: ‘Monks, as even a trifling bit 
of excrement has an evil smell, I do not praise even 
the most trifling spell of existence, though no longer 
than a snap of the fingers.’ 20 Yün-men’s definition of 
Buddhism merely paraphrased the Buddha himself.
2.vi. A final technique is the way of negation. When 
a monk asks Nan-ch’üan (now out of his bath), ‘What is

445
HAROLD BEAVER
the fundamental truth that has never been expounded 
for people?’ and we hear the reply, ‘It is not mind; it is 
not Buddha; it is not beings’ (Case 27), it’s as if we’re 
sent skidding out of control. Brakes screech. We jerk to 
a dead halt. The intellect, revving over and over, throbs 
furiously in frustration. Skip to Case 30. When the 
question is raised, ‘What is Buddha?’ it is definitively 
answered: ‘This very mind is Buddha.’ Skip to Case 
33. When the very same question is again raised, that 
answer is flatly contradicted: ‘Not mind, not Buddha.’ 
Where is one to find a point of equilibrium on this seesaw? Can each and every proposition be stood on its 
head? Is topsy-turvydom endemic in Zen?
By this time the answer should occasion no surprise. 
Zen revels in these sudden shifts of perspective 
that realign language, invert paradox and expose 
overlapping strata of comprehension to instant chaos:
‘With realization, all things are one family; 
without realization, all things are disconnected,’
as Wu-men comments in Case 16. So far so good. This 
merely restates an aspect of what Aldous Huxley called 
‘the perennial philosophy’. But now for the flipside! 
Wu-men continues:
‘Without realization, all things are one family; 
with realization, all things are disconnected.’
The bottom of the bucket is suddenly kicked out. The 
second set of propositions does not merely block, or 
contradict, the first. Rather, it scatters its linguistic

446
THE BROKEN GONG
components; and it is this simultaneous awareness of 
the combined truth of both couplets that Zen illumines.
*  *  *
Wittgenstein, writing a letter, once put it like this: 
‘if only you do not try to utter what is unutterable 
then nothing gets lost. But the unutterable will be – 
unutterably – contained in what has been uttered!’ 21 
That is very close to Zen without opting for Zen’s 
zanier antics, those clowning aspects, while attractive 
to some, invariably upset others. Much the same could 
be said of that famous final sentence of the Tractatus 
Logico-Philosophicus: ‘Wovon man nicht sprechen 
kann, darüber muss man schweigen.’ (‘Whereof one 
cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.’) On which 
Ray Monk comments: ‘The nonsense that results 
from trying to say what can only be shown is not only 
logically untenable, but ethically undesirable.’ 22 That 
is wholly in the Zen spirit, though again rather too 
sanely expressed for some tastes. Many continue to 
this day ‘trying to say’ it, charging at Wu-men’s barrier: 
‘You cannot use words. You cannot not use words’ 
(Case 43). Chuang-tzu, millennia earlier, had already
probed this paradox:
‘The purpose of words is to convey ideas;
When the ideas are grasped, the words are forgotten. 
Where can I find a man who has forgotten words?
He is the man I would like to talk to.’23

447
HAROLD BEAVER
Was there ever such a man in the West who had 
‘forgotten words’? Or a woman we would ‘like to talk 
to’? Rilke, of the Eighth Duino Elegy, perhaps, is one 
likely candidate. Another is Wittgenstein, so much 
attuned to the Zen spirit that once, in conversation at 
Cornell, he unwittingly uttered this lovely haiku:
‘And if there were only 
The moon there would be 
No reading and writing.’24
Another, ever alert to the comic potential of this 
bleak predicament, must be Samuel Beckett. 25 Yet 
another is surely Wallace Stevens, endlessly probing 
and circling the inexpressible, as in these wonderfully 
rapt, serene, detached, disenchanted lines from ‘The 
Snow Man’:
‘ ... the listener, who listens in the snow, 
And, nothing himself, beholds
Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is.’





Since no previous attempt has been made at enquiring 
into the function of art and language in the Buddha’s 
teaching, no bibliography in the usual sense is possible. 
The few titles which I found relevant, or useful, on 
conceiving this literary study, such as K. N. Jayatilleke, 
Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge (London: George 
Allen & Unwin, 1963) and Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, Concept 
and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought (Kandy: Buddhist 
Publication Society, 1971), for Chapter 1, or T. W. Rhys 
Davids, Buddhist India (London, 1903, current edition 
c/o Kessinger Publications), for Chapter 6, are recorded 
separately in the Notes. To which should be added 
Richard Gombrich, How Buddhism Began: The Conditioned 
Genesis of the Early Teachings (New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal Publishers, 1996).
The suttas themselves provided the major impetus 
and source material. The key original collections (or 
Nikayās) are:
The Dīgha Nikāya, ‘The Long Discourses of the Buddha’; 
The Majjhima Nikāya, ‘The Middle Length Discourses of 
the Buddha’;

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The Saṁyutta Nikāya, ‘The Connected Discourses of the 
Buddha’;
The Aṅguttara Nikāya, ‘The Numerical Discourses of
the Buddha’.
To these was later added a fifth, or ‘lesser’, 
collection, the Khuddaka Nikāya , from which the 
Dhammapada (an anthology of gnomic excerpts or 
versified quotations from the Buddha’s teaching) is 
most relevant in this context. These five collections, of 
which the Khuddaka Nikāya eventually grew to be the 
most voluminous, completed the sutta-basket (or Suttapiṭaka) of the threefold basket (or Tripiṭaka) – including 
the Vinaya (or Code of Discipline) and Abhidhamma (or 
‘Higher Dhamma’) – which constitute the Buddhist 
scriptures. Rather than abbreviate individual titles, 
I have everywhere given the name of each sutta and 
the collection from which it derives in full in order to 
familiarize readers with the documentary evidence.
The translations, in all cases, are my own since 
no available translation, I found, lent itself easily to 
quotation. Either too literal, or clumsy, or unrhythmical, 
or poetic, or archaic, or repetitive (a marked feature 
of the Pali original), or awkwardly syncopated, almost 
nothing reads with the assured clarity and intensity 
and fluidity which are their most marked, original 
features. Almost nothing, that is, reads like the founding 
document of a great religion.

THE BROKEN GONG

But my own efforts (tested at length in Chapters 
10 and 11), of course, parallel and supersede previous 
translations. I had hoped, for example, to make 
wholesale use of the late Maurice Walshe’s versions 
of the Sāmaññaphala Sutta and Pāyāsi Sutta (both 
from the Dīgha Nikāya) but, in the event, found them 
intractable. The Notes refer to the most commonly 
available translated sources (often in selection only), 
and otherwise to the standard Pali edition in the Pali 
Text Society (Text Series) editions of the Theravada 
Canon (‘PTS’, in short). The earliest Victorian and 
Edwardian translations by T. W. Rhys Davids and 
others accompanying that series still make a valuable 
historical resource, but with their Swinburnian lilt and 
biblical resonance remain of antiquarian interest only.
The translations mainly consulted were:
For the Dīgha Nikāya : Maurice Walshe, The Long 
Discourses of the Buddha  (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 
1995), originally published under the title Thus Have 
I Heard: The Long Discourses of the Buddha  (1987) – a 
complete translation of all 34 suttas.
Valuable, too, is a collection of ‘Ten Suttas from the 
Dīgha Nikāya’, an English translation published by the 
Burma Piṭaka Association (Rangoon, 1984).
For the Majjhima Nikāya: The Venerable Ñāṇamoli 
Thera, Middle Length Sayings, edited and revised by 
Bhikkhu Bodhi (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995) – 
the complete translation of all 152 suttas. Earlier the 
Venerable Khantipālo (now Laurence Mills), with the 
help of Ñāṇaponika Mahāthera, had made a selection of

BIBLIOGRAPHY

90 suttas translated by the Venerable Ñāṇamoli Thera, 
published under the title A Treasury of the Buddha’s 
Words, 3 volumes (Bangkok: Mahāmakut Press, 1976).
For the Saṁyutta Nikāya: An anthology selected for 
The Wheel (Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society): Part 
One, edited and translated by John D. Ireland (The 
Wheel, nos. 107, 108 and 109, 1981); Part Two, edited and 
selected by Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda (The Wheel, nos. 183, 
184 and 185, 1972); Part Three, edited and selected by 
M. O’C. [Maurice] Walshe (The Wheel, nos. 318, 319, 320 
and 321, 1985).
For the Aṅguttara Nikāya: An anthology selected for 
The Wheel (Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society): Book 
of the Ones to Book of the Fours, translated and edited 
by Ñāṇaponika Thera (The Wheel, nos. 155, 156, 157 
and 158, 1970); Book of the Fives to Book of the Eights, 
translated and edited by Ñāṇaponika Thera (The Wheel, 
nos. 208, 209, 210 and 211, 1975); Book of the Eights 
(concluded) to Book of the Elevens, translated and 
edited by Ñāṇaponika Thera (The Wheel, nos. 238, 239 
and 240, 1976); all bound into a single volume (1981).
For the Dhammapada: The Venerable Khantipālo 
(now Laurence Mills), Dhammapada: The Path of Truth 
(Bangkok: Mahāmakut Press, 1977). Dhammapada, 
translated with notes and commentary by John Ross 
Carter and Mahinda Palihawadana (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1987). The Dhammapada: The Buddha’s 
Path of Wisdom, translated by Acharya Buddharakkhita 
(Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 1985).

Arahant: (Sanskrit, Arhat) Literally ‘worthy one’,
 cleansed of defilement (kilesa) and released
 from the wheel of rebirth (saṃsāra).
Ariyasacca: In full, cattāri ariyasaccāni, or 
 ‘Four Noble Truths’.
Atta:  The self.
Bhikkhu:  From the root bhik, ‘to beg’: common term 
 for a Buddhist ‘sharesman’, or monk.
Brahman: (Sanskrit, Brāhmaṇa) Member of the second
Hindu caste (or vaṇṇa, literally ‘colour’) 
during the Buddha’s lifetime, versed in sacred 
knowledge (the Vedas) and eligible to perform 
priestly ceremonies and sacrifices.
Buddha: One who knows; who is ‘awakened’.
 
Deva: Literally ‘a shining one’, angel or divine
 spirit: the impermanent inhabitant of one
 of the lower heavens.

GLOSSARY

Dhamma: An often confusing, because fluctuating,
concept denoting both the Law of Nature and 
‘instruction in the Law’: that is, both ‘living 
according to the ultimate nature of things’ 
and a ‘religious discourse’ on the virtuous life 
(including any canonical text), as well as nonmaterial processes such as senses, feelings, 
perceptions, volitions, memories and mental 
states; even (in the plural) just ‘things’ generally. 
Dukkha: Dissatisfaction, anguish; literally
 the ‘unendurable’.
Jhāna: ‘Trance’ or absorption.
Kamma: (Sanskrit, karma) Any intentional action (of
body, speech or mind) arising from wholesome 
(kusala) and unwholesome (akusala) volitions. 
Kamma has nothing to do with fate or luck; nor 
does it mean the result of actions (vipāka).
Khattiya: Warriors and noblemen, members of the highest
Hindu caste during the Buddha’s lifetime.
Kilesa: Mental ‘stains’ or defilements whose three
 main categories are greed or lust (lobha,
 rāga), hatred or anger (dosa, kodha) and
 delusion or blindness to the Dhamma (moha).

THE BROKEN GONG

Māra: Literally the ‘killer’, personification of the
 passions; so, ultimately, of the self, of evil,
 of dukkha and death.
Nāma-rūpa: ‘Name-and-Form’, or ‘Naming-and-Form’:
 that is, the mind-body duality which, in all its
 activity, needs no further ‘being’ or ‘self’ (attā).
Nibbāna: (Sanskrit, nirvāna) Literally ‘a ceasing (nī)
 to blow (vā)’ the bellows on a smith’s fire; so
 a ‘cooling’ (of the fires of kilesa) and
 quenching (of dukkha), freed from egoistic
 attachment. 
Paññā: Wisdom.
Paribbājaka: Homeless wanderer.
Parinibbāna: Complete, or final, nibbāna on the death of
 an Arahant – especially of the Buddha.
Pāṭimokkha: The 227 rules for monks, codified
 from the Vinaya and reaffirmed before their
 abbot each night of the new, half-full and
 full moon (Uposatha).*
* The presence of an abbot is not a factor for such a recitation, nor does it 
have to occur at night. A recitation of the Pāṭimokkha is an obligation when 
four or more bhikkhus are in the same territory on the Uposatha day. There 
is also a Bhikkhuni-Pāṭimokkha whose method of observance is the same. (Ed.)

GLOSSARY

Rājā: ‘King’, but also an elected chief like the
 Buddha’s father, Suddhodana.
Samādhi: ‘Concentration’, especially in meditation. 
Samaṇa: Literally ‘peaceful one’ – one who has
 calmed himself: a renunciate, that is,
 who has gone forth from home to
 homelessness (not necessarily a Buddhist).
Saṃsāra: The infinite round of births and deaths kept
 spinning by ignorance (avijjā), desire
 (taṇhā), attachment (upādāna) and pollution
 (kilesa).
Sangha: ‘Community’ of those who practise
 according to the Dhamma as taught by the
 Buddha.
Sīla: ‘Restraint’, and so right conduct. 
Tathāgata: ‘Thus come’ (tathā āgato) by the aspiration
 for enlightenment; ‘thus gone’ (tathā gato)
 by the way of the former Buddhas.
Thera: Elder monk of more than ten years’
 standing. 
Vipassanā: Insight meditation.

ā as in ‘father’ 
ī as in ‘machine’ 
ū as in ‘rude’
a as in ‘fun’
o and e (unless before two consonants) always carry a 
stress: viz. ‘King Pasénadi of Kósala’
g as in ‘girl’ 
j as in ‘judge’ 
y as in ‘yes’
ṃ as in ‘sing ’: viz. more a mark of nasalization, as in 
‘Saṃyutta Ñikaya’, or ‘saṃsara’

459
ñ as in ‘onion’
ṣ or ś as in ‘shine’ 
c as in ‘church’
t, d, n, l spoken with tongue tapping the front teeth
ṭ, ḍ, ṇ, ḷ spoken with tongue curled back along the 
palate; double consonants (e.g. ‘dd’ or ‘gg’) require 
double percussion as in ‘mad dog’ or ‘biggun’
h is always given a separate value
bh, ch, dh, gh, kh, ph, th are unitary consonants 
(represented by one letter in Pali), but pronounced 
with a puff of breath as in ‘abhorrence’, ‘which house?’, 
‘red-hot’, ‘pig-headed’, ‘blockhead’, ‘uph olstery’ and 
‘hot-house’

In accordance with his academic training, Harold was 
keen on citing source texts to authorize his line of 
thought in The Broken Gong, and he frequently refers 
to the texts of the Pali Canon. At the time when he 
wrote this book, the English translations of that Canon 
were for the most part in the editions of the Pali Text 
Society – and often lacking in fluency and accessibility 
to the average reader. Harold replaced many of these 
translations with his own, prioritizing accessibility 
over academic accuracy. Although he always captures 
the gist of the text, I have notified the reader in those 
instances where I feel that he has deviated from an 
accurate rendition. 
Harold also referred to other translations, notably 
those of the Buddhist Publication Society of Kandy, Sri 
Lanka, who produced selections from the Saṁyutta and 
Aṅguttara Nikāyas. Since then the four major Nikāyas 
of the Pali Canon have been re-translated into English 
and published by Wisdom Publications of Boston, USA.

NOTES

The system that Harold used in his citations was 
that favoured by academics: to refer to the volume 
and page of the original Pali text as produced by the 
PTS. I have replaced that system with one that refers 
to the English version produced by Wisdom, as I feel 
that most readers who wish to verify the quote or refer 
to the source text will be going to this version of those 
Nikāyas. 
In terms of the Sutta-piṭaka, I cite the name of the 
Nikāya, and the number of the sutta, along with the 
section and/or paragraph number, in the Dīgha and 
Majjhima Nikāyas. To assist the reader in the more 
complex organisation of the Saṁyutta Nikāya , I have 
added the volume of the PTS English version, the name 
of the book (vagga) and the number of the sutta within 
that book. For the sake of simplicity, I have omitted the 
name of the chapter in the book. Hence Saṁyutta Nikāya 
(the Nikāya); IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] (number and name 
of the book); 42: (number of the chapter); 7 (number 
of the sutta within that chapter). In this case, if you 
follow this schema, you should arrive at ‘The Simile of 
the Field’. In the case of the Aṅguttara Nikāya , I have 
referred to the relevant book and sutta; so 5:1 is the first 
sutta of the Book of the Fives, for example. Itivuttaka 
and Udāna references are to the chapters and suttas in 
those works (an English translation is available both 
through the PTS and the Buddhist Publication Society 
of Kandy, Sri Lanka). Dhammapada references are to 
the verse, and Jātaka references are to the number 
of the story. There are many translations of these

THE BROKEN GONG

works available online; and www.accesstoinsight.org 
and www.suttacentral.net are both excellent sources.
The Vinaya-piṭaka citations were made more 
problematic by the PTS’ rearrangement of the English 
translation so that its volumes do not correspond to 
the order of the books in the Pali. Here I have adopted 
a system of referring to the name of the Pali book, 
followed in the case of the narrative books by the 
chapter and section number, or in the Suttavibhanga, to 
the rule in those books. For a cross reference, I have 
added a reference to the PTS English version with 
the page number of the Pali text, which is currently 
embedded in the English text. 
Another ancient Pali text that Harold referenced is 
the Milindapañha, which is available in English as the 
PTS translation ‘The Questions of King Milinda’ and 
also as a more recent version, ‘The Debate of King 
Milinda’ by Bhikkhu Pesala (Inward Path, PO Box 1034, 
10830 Penang, Malaysia; also available at www.aimwell.
org/milinda.html).
As this aspect of The Broken Gong hadn’t received 
Harold’s detailed attention at the time of his death, I 
have on occasion had to make an educated estimate as 
to which particular passage he was referencing. I hope 
that this doesn’t detract from the reader’s use of these 
notes to deepen his or her understanding.

NOTES
AUTHOR’S PREFACE
1. ‘compiling a “Life” of the Buddha’: Attempts (in English) include: W. W. 
Rockhill, Life of the Buddha (2nd ed. London, 1907); E. H. Brewster, The Life 
of Gotama Buddha: Compiled Exclusively from the Pali Canon (London, 1926); E. 
J. Thomas, Life of the Buddha as Legend and History (London, 1927); Bhikkhu 
Ñāṇamoli, The Life of the Buddha According to the Pali Canon (Kandy, Sri Lanka, 
1972); the Venerable H. Saddhātissa, Life of the Buddha  (London, 1976); H. 
W. Schumann, The Historical Buddha, trans. Maurice Walshe (London, 1988); 
Phra Khantipālo, The Splendour of Enlightenment: A Life of the Buddha , 2 vols. 
(Bangkok, 1990).
2. ‘establishing a monastic order’: From well over 100 miles south-east 
of Vārānasī (modern Benares) to well over 100 miles to the north-west; 
that is, from Rājagaha, capital of Magadha (now roughly the state of 
Bihar), where the Buddha was based for the last twenty years of his life, to 
Sāvatthī, capital of Kosala, where he spent some twenty-five Rainy Seasons 
and delivered 871 of the discourses recorded in the Sutta-piṭaka.
3. ‘an independently verifiable event’: See the prologue of the 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta, for example: ‘Now just then King Ajātasattu 
Vedehiputta of Magadha planned to attack the Vajjī princes’ (Dīgha Nikāya 
16:1.1); or of the Sangīti Sutta: ‘Just at that time a new meeting-hall of 
the Mallas of Pāvā ... had recently been built’ (Dīgha Nikāya  33:1.2). Even 
locations in space differ widely in different versions and were never 
regarded as Buddhavacana: that is, canonical.
4. ‘to adapt three titles by Robert Alter, Frank Kermode and Northrop Frye’: 
Robert Alter, The Art of Biblical Narrative (New York, 1981); Robert Alter and 
Frank Kermode (eds.), The Literary Guide to the Bible (Harvard University 
Press, 1987); Northrop Frye, The Great Code: The Bible and Literature  (New 
York, 1982).
5. ‘as Kafka ... concluded a problematic reading’: Of one of his own parables 
– that of the door-keeper in The Trial (1925), trans. Douglas Scott and Chris 
Waller (London, 1988), ch. 9, ‘In the Cathedral’.

THE BROKEN GONG

6. ‘a land-bird disorientated when released at sea’: Dīgha Nikāya, Kevaddha 
Sutta (11:85).
7. ‘statements about personality must be speculative’: Ajahn Sucitto, ‘A 
Personal Tradition’, Forest Sangha Newsletter, no. 44 (April 1998). Citta, in 
Pali, is the subjective core of the personality, dependently formed, in a 
constant ferment of adaptation.
8. ‘in Bultmann’s terms’: R. Bultmann, Die Geschichte der synoptischen 
Tradition (1931), pp. 179-222.
9. ‘If the parables are taken as a whole’: Their ‘realism is remarkable’, 
giving ‘probably a more complete picture of petit-bourgeois and peasant 
life than we possess for any other province of the Roman Empire except 
Egypt, where papyri come to our aid’, C. H. Dodd, The Parables of the Kingdom 
(1935), revised ed. 1961, p. 20. See also Dodd, The Authority of the Bible (1929), 
revised ed. 1960, pp. 144-148.
10. ‘the ars intelligendi and the ars explicandi’: Interpretatio implied a clear 
understanding of a speaker’s meaning; while applicatio implied the 
ability to make that meaning significant for a particular audience. Both 
are essential: the Buddha singled out ‘wrong interpretation’ and ‘wrong 
expression’ as especially prone to undermining the Dhamma (Aṅguttara 
Nikāya 2:20).
11. ‘and if you fail to grasp the meaning of any statement’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Ghoṭamukha Sutta (94:4).
12. ‘in debate with a wealthy Jain’: Majjhima Nikāya, Upāli Sutta (56:10).
13. ‘analysed before being answered’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahākammavibhanga 
Sutta (136:4).
14. ‘if you mean “x”... if you say “y”’: Dīgha Nikāya, Pāsādika Sutta (29:18). 
Cf. also Majjhima Nikāya , Kinti Sutta (103) on problems of meaning and 
phrasing.
15. ‘the complexities of ... narrative time’: For theoretical work, see, for 
example, A. J. Greimas, Tzvetan Todorov and especially Wayne C. Booth, 
The Rhetoric of Fiction (Chicago, 1961) and Gerard Genette, Narrative Discourse 
(Paris, 1972), translated by Jane E. Lewin (Oxford, 1980).
16. ‘perennial ages ... common to all Aryan peoples’: Familiar from Hesiod, 
but equally found in the Avesta of the Buddha’s close contemporary, 
Zarathustra.
17. ‘that Land of Cockaigne’: ‘In the shadow of Mount Neru/ Where 
lovely Northern Kuru lies ...’: Dīgha Nikāya, Āṭānāṭiya Sutta (32:7), sung as 
protective verses against yakkhas (ogres or fairies).

NOTES

18. ‘Some “Ariyan wheel-turning monarch”’: Dīgha Nikāya, CakkavattiSīhanāda Sutta (26:4); for those fabled ‘revolutions’, see 26:9-21. Dīgha 
Nikāya, Aggañña Sutta (27:13-19), ascribes the whole caste system to the 
original sins of greed and lust, just as Plato, in The Republic, institutes a class 
system (of guardians, auxiliaries, farmers and workers) by matching each 
rank with a metallic admixture, then condemning any genetic mismatch 
as miscegenation.
19. ‘our contracting and expanding universe’: Dīgha Nikāya , Brahmajāla 
Sutta (1:2.2) and Aggañña Sutta (27:10).
20. ‘waters everywhere surged’: Dīgha Nikāya, Aggañña Sutta (27:11-12). For 
a full account, see R.F. Gombrich, ‘The Buddha’s Book of Genesis?’ IndoIranian Journal, vol. 35 (1992), pp. 159-178.
21. ‘And the earth was without form …’: Genesis i, 2-10.
22. ‘his screw-compass or dividers’: An image that goes back at least to the 
thirteenth century. See Anthony Blunt, The Art of William Blake (Columbia 
University Press, 1959), Plates 24 a and b.
23. ‘The Buddha rarely uses images’: Roberto Calasso, Ka (Milan, 1996), 
translated from the Italian by Tim Parks (London, 1998), pp. 357-358 and 
367 (with one adjustment).
24. ‘a recent edition of the Majjhima Nikāya’: The Middle Length Discourses 
of the Buddha,  translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli, edited and revised by 
Bhikkhu Bodhi (Boston, 1995), ‘Index of Similes’, pp. 1407-1409.
25. ‘What do you think about me?’: Majjhima Nikāya, Kinti Sutta (103). The 
Buddha goes on to explain how monks should resolve their differences 
about the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, and the Five Faculties, and the 
Seven Factors of Enlightenment, and the Noble Eightfold Path, etc.
26. ‘marks of the Great Man’: Majjhima Nikāya, Brahmāyu Sutta (91).
1. THE LANGUAGE CONUNDRUM
1. ‘free of patchwork’: Pali, chinna-pilotika, literally ‘devoid of the 
characteristics of a rag with loose, or cut off, threads,’ Majjhima Nikāya , 
Alagaddūpama Sutta (22:42).
2. ‘lovely in its beginning’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 42:7. 
‘Spirit’ might also be translated as ‘meaning’; ‘letter’, in a syllabic script, 
as ‘syllable’.

THE BROKEN GONG

3. ‘Brahmajāla, the Net of Perfect Wisdom’: Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta 
(1), conclusion.
4. ‘When a skilful fisherman or his apprentice’: Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla 
Sutta (1:3.72).
5. ‘the Net of his Knowledge ... the Net of Great Compassion’: Dhammapada 
Commentary i. 319-322 and iii. 170-176; and Dīgha Nikāya Commentary i. 45-48.
6. ‘the deliverance of mind that is signless’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāvedalla 
Sutta (43:34). Cf. Moggallāna in Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 40:9.
7. ‘hard to trace as that of birds’: Dhammapada 92.
8. ‘declared “Undeclared”’: Dhammapada 218.
9. ‘If the terms are incorrect’: The Analects of Confucius, book 13, ch. 3, 
modifying the translation by Simon Leys (New York: W.W. Norton, 1997).
10. ‘the coarse debarring the mental, the mental debarring the formless’: 
Dīgha Nikāya, Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (9:428-440), on the arising of three forms of 
Attabhāva.
11. ‘That monk might still use words like “I”’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  I 
[Sagāthāvagga] 1:25.
12. ‘Who in the rainbow can draw the line’: Herman Melville, Billy Budd, 
Sailor, ch. 21.
13. ‘From the cow we get fresh milk’: Dīgha Nikāya, Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (9:5253). Citta was the son of a mahout, or elephant trainer, converted by this 
sutta to request admission into the Buddhist order. ‘Tathāgata’ (literally 
‘thus come’ by the aspiration for enlightenment, ‘thus gone’ by the way of 
the former Buddhas) was the Buddha’s favourite third-person locution in 
referring to himself.
14. ‘In the most complex of his expositions’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mūlapariyāya 
Sutta (1).
15. ‘Those who live by names and concepts’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I 
[Sagāthāvagga] 1:20. Nāma-rūpa, Pali for ‘name-and-form’, should rather 
be ‘naming-and-form’; for nāma (which rarely occurs independently) 
here has the active connotation of ‘namer’ or ‘mind’. The compound is as 
indissoluble as two sides of a coin, or the two aspects of the sign which 
Saussure called signifiant and signifié (the acoustic ‘signifier’ arbitrarily 
linked to the conceptually ‘signified’).

NOTES

16. ‘anxious to avoid disputes’: K. N. Jayatilleke, Early Buddhist Theory of 
Knowledge (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1963), ch. 6, p. 313.
17. ‘Don’t cling to vernacular usage’: Majjhima Nikāya, Araṇavibhanga Sutta 
(139:12).
18. ‘If this fire in front of you were to blow out’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Aggivacchagotta Sutta (72:18).
19. ‘two-horned question’: Literally ‘an iron water-chestnut’ (trapa bicornis), 
an edible nut with a tough two-horned shell, like a miniature bull’s head: 
Majjhima Nikāya, Abhayarājakumāra Sutta (58:4).
20. ‘no outright answer to that, Prince’: Majjhima Nikāya, Abhayarājakumāra 
Sutta (58:8).
21. ‘the flame of a candle ... after the candle is blown out’.: Lewis Carroll, 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, ch. ‘Down the Rabbit-Hole’.
22. ‘the implications of our symbolism’: Ludwig Wittgenstein, The Blue and 
Brown Books (Oxford, 1958), p. 108. See also George Pitcher, ‘Wittgenstein, 
Nonsense, and Lewis Carroll’, The Massachusetts Review VI (1965), pp. 591611.
23. ‘linguistic conventions’: In Pali, there were three distinct uses, or 
functions, of the verb ‘to be’: ahosi (it has been), atthi (it exists) and bhavissati 
(it will be). Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:62 emphasizes the need 
to keep ‘these three linguistic conventions’ apart without confusing them.
24. ‘the meanings are different as well as the words’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Mahāvedalla Sutta (43:30). 
25. ‘dissimilar meanings ... dissimilar etymology’: See Jayatilleke, Early 
Buddhist Theory of Knowledge, ch. 6, p. 315. Cf. Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāvedalla 
Sutta (43:30) and Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 41:7. Which may 
also suggest why the Buddha nowhere discussed dissimilar meanings 
derived from a shared etymology (e.g. in English, ‘stationary’/‘stationery’).
26. ‘brazenly distorted the etymology’: See Dhammapada 388 and Saṁyutta 
Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:78. See ch. 7, pp. 176-177.
27. ‘his Chinese close contemporary’: The Taoist sage, Chuang-tzu (c. fourth 
century BCE). A more literal translation, within its full context, reads:
‘Nets are for fish: catch the fish and forget the net;
Snares are for rabbits: catch the rabbit and forget the snare; 
Words are for ideas: catch the idea and forget the words.
Oh, where can I find somebody to talk with who has forgotten the words?’

THE BROKEN GONG

28. ‘For all symbols are fluxional’: Emerson, ‘The Poet’ (Essays, Second 
Series), 1844.
29. ‘how the Dhamma is like a raft’: Majjhima Nikāya, Alagaddūpama Sutta 
(22:13).
30. ‘Just as the great ocean has only one taste’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:19. Cf. 
Cullavagga 9:1 and Udāna 5:5. ‘Freedom’ here, as usual, implies ‘liberation’ 
or ‘deliverance’.
31. ‘The “divine chariot” ... also called “car” of the Dhamma’: ‘Its axle, 
meditation; energy, its wheels;/ Mind’s equilibrium, its even shaft ...’ 
Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 45:4. See also ch. 6, p. 173.
32. ‘Builder, you’ve been seen!’: Dhammapada 154.
33. ‘a snarled skein of yarn’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahānidāna Sutta (15:95). Cf. 
Saṁyutta Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 12:60.
34. ‘a bag with a hole at each end’: Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta 
(22:5). Cf. Majjhima Nikāya, Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta (10) and Bodhirājakumāra Sutta 
(85).
35. ‘a skilful butcher ... having slaughtered a cow’: Dīgha Nikāya, 
Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta (22:6).
36. ‘A grammarian is not a kind of scientist’: R. G. Collingwood, The Principles 
of Art (Oxford University Press, 1938), p. 257.
37. ‘Name has soiled everything’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 1:61. 
‘Overwhelmed’ may be a better reading.
38. ‘in this very fathom-long body’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:45. Cf. Saṁyutta 
Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 2:26.
39. ‘the Parable of the Watersnake’: Majjhima Nikāya, Alagaddūpama Sutta 
(22).
40. ‘any pathway for verbal expression’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahānidāna Sutta 
(14:22). More literally, through this mutual conditioning of consciousness 
(viññāṇa) and name-and-form (nāma-rūpa ), there arises: 1. the basis 
(patha) for arbitrary nomenclature (adhivacana  or ‘name without specific 
meaning’); 2. the basis for specific denotation (nirutti ); 3. the basis for 
honorific appelation (paññatti ); 4. the sphere of the intellect; and 5. the 
cycle of existences. Again and again, the Buddha reiterates: ‘Consciousness 
is dependent on name-and-form; name-and-form is dependent on

NOTES

consciousness’ (Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāpadāna Sutta [14:2.19]); ‘from the arising 
of name-and-form arises consciousness; from the ceasing of name-andform consciousness ceases’ (Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:57).
41. ‘What is it that soils everything?’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 
1:61. Lao-tzu also called name ‘the mother of all things’; in the words of 
the Tao-te-Ching:
‘The nameless is the origin of heaven and earth; 
Naming is the mother of ten thousand things.’
42. ‘Even viññāṇa ... is illusion’: Cf. ‘The Kinsman of the Sun [the Buddha] 
has compared ... consciousness to an illusion’, Saṁyutta Nikāya III 
[Khandhavagga] 22:95.
43. ‘two bundles of reeds ... one supporting the other’: Saṁyutta Nikāya II 
[Nidānavagga] 12:67.
44. ‘infinite regress in thought’: Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, Concept and Reality 
in Early Buddhist Thought (Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 1971), ch. 
1, p. 93.
45. ‘Some nine centuries later Buddhaghosa’: Buddhaghosa travelled to Sri 
Lanka around c. 430 CE ‘because in India the aṭṭhakathā [commentaries] 
had been lost’, Mahāvaṃsa, xxxvii.
46. ‘Two truths the Buddha (best of all who speak) declared’: Buddhaghosa’s 
gloss on Majjhima Nikāya, Anangaṇa Sutta (5): that is, conventional speech 
(sammuti-kathā) operates in terms of conventional or relative truth 
(sammuti-sacca or vohāra-sacca); absolutely true speech (paramattha-kathā ) 
operates in terms of ultimate or absolute truth (paramattha-sacca).
47. ‘the whole later exposition of his teaching’: In the seven books of the 
Abhidhamma.
48. The muni is silent not only when he does not speak’: Ñāṇananda, Concept 
and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought, p. 38. Cf. Sutta Nipāta 787. See also ch. 
7, p. 175.
49. ‘Monks, I do not dispute with the world’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III 
[Khandhavagga] 22:94.
50. ‘Where consciousness is signless ...’: Dīgha Nikāya, Kevaddha Sutta (11:85), 
conclusion.
51. ‘the Parable of the Relays’: Majjhima Nikāya, Rathavinīta Sutta (24).

THE BROKEN GONG

2. A DIALECTICAL FREE-FOR-ALL
1. ‘I am one who answers after analysing’: Majjhima Nikāya, Subha Sutta 
(99:4).
2. ‘How do you conceive this, bhikkhus’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
22:59. Bhikkhu, usually translated as ‘monk’, came to mean ‘sharesman’: 
that is, one sharing common wealth or public resources. Only the 
Buddhist order perpetuated the older political form of republican 
sanghas (independent patrician assemblies) in a new spiritual guise. In 
his eightieth year, the Buddha still praised the Vajjian republican system, 
recommending comparable rules for the Sangha: cf. the Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta and Aṅguttara Nikāya  7:20. Despite Chinese and Tibetan traditions, 
Majjhima Nikāya , Gopakamoggallāna Sutta (108), explicitly states that the 
Buddhist Sangha had no recognized head.
3. ‘Lord, have you seen a woman about’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 1:14 [PTS 
vol. 4, 23]. 
4. ‘which is greater, this speck of dust or this mighty earth?’: Saṁyutta 
Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 56:61.
5. ‘“gathering up a handful” of fallen leaves’: Saṃyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 
56:31. Cf. the ‘small stone’ and ‘Himalaya, the king of mountains’ in 
Majjhima Nikāya, Bālapaṇḍita Sutta (129:9 and 47).
6. ‘the seven-year-old Rāhula had washed his feet’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Ambalaṭṭhikā Rāhulovāda Sutta (61:2-6).
7. ‘they’d conspire on a common questionnaire’: King Pasenadi of 
Kosala speaking in Majjhima Nikāya , Dhammacetiya Sutta (89); cf. also 
Cūḷahatthipadopama Sutta (27:4) and Abhayarājakumāra Sutta (58:4).
8. ‘would a Tathāgata utter such a speech’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Abhayarājakumāra Sutta (58:4).
9. ‘which of the venerable ones is more a dweller in happiness’: Majjhima 
Nikāya, Cūḷadukkhakkhandha Sutta (14:20-21).
10. ‘the answer would occur to me immediately’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Abhayarāja-kumāra Sutta (58:10).
11. ‘the art of wielding a goad while riding an elephant’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Bodhirājakumāra Sutta (85:57).
12. ‘popularly regarded as a valid ready-reckoner’: Ñāṇananda , Concept 
and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought, p. 17. See Dīgha Nikāya , Poṭṭhapāda

NOTES

Sutta (9:25-30) and Saṁyutta Nikāya  V [Mahāvagga] 45:141-148. Cf. also 
the various approaches to the Buddha by the wandering ascetic Uttiya 
(Aṅguttara Nikāya 10:95), the Venerable Māluṇkyāputta and Vacchagotta 
the wanderer (Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷamāluṅkya Sutta [63] and Aggivacchagotta 
Sutta [72]).
13. ‘This is not what I shall teach you’: Dīgha Nikāya, Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (9:2530). A few days later – when the ascetic Poṭṭhapāda returned with Citta, the 
mahout – the Buddha again insisted that such matters were useless; only 
the Aryasacca (Four Noble Truths) were directly beneficial for the religious 
life.
14. ‘If by the past is meant what is true’: Dīgha Nikāya, Pāsādika Sutta (29:28). 
15. ‘By their fruits ye shall know them’: Matthew vii, 20.
16. ‘Whereof one may not [usefully] speak’: ‘Wovon man nicht sprechen 
kann, darüber muss man schweigen’: final proposition of Wittgenstein’s 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1922).
17. ‘lead only to insanity and distress’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 2:80.
18. ‘a good deal that the human brain cannot grasp’: John R. Searle, The 
Rediscovery of the Mind (Boston: MIT Press, 1992).
19. ‘the way a goldsmith analyses gold’: Tattvasaṃgraha 3588 as well as the 
Tibetan version of the Jñānasamuccayasāra.
20. ‘as if the Buddha stood on the edge of the shore’: Not unlike Newton’s 
humble (scientific) admission that he felt himself to have been ‘only like 
a boy playing on the seashore ... whilst the great ocean of truth lay all 
undiscovered before me’.
21. ‘that handful of fallen sisu leaves’: from the sīsapā (Dalbergia sisu), also 
known as the Aśoka tree.
22. ‘by an arrow thickly smeared with poison’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Cūḷamāluṇkya Sutta (63:5) ff.
23. ‘the Paribbājaka (itinerant sages)’: literally ‘going forth’ in homelessness 
and celibacy, renouncing status and caste.
24. ‘Why did the Nigaṇṭha enter an empty house’: Majjhima Nikāya, Sandaka 
Sutta (76:21).
25. ‘their mothers’ dead sons’: ibid. (76:61).

THE BROKEN GONG

26. ‘nor scope for deliberate self-defilement’: ibid. (76:13).
27. ‘that foolish man Makkhali’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 1:33.
28. ‘Sākyaputtīya samaṇas’: Samaṇa literally means ‘one who is peaceful’. In 
Japan, the Buddha is still known as Sākyamuni, the Sākya sage.
29. ‘A noble warrior, a serpent, a fire and a bhikkhu’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  
I [Sagāthāvagga] 3:1. The six contemporaries of the Buddha, questioned 
by King Pasenadi, are most succinctly characterized in Dīgha Nikāya , 
Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:16-33). Purāṇa Kassapa was an extreme amoralist 
whose doctrine of Akiriya argued against any possible moral effect of 
any action: ‘Even if one were to mince everyone on this earth with a 
circular saw into steak tartare, no evil would result.’ Makkhali Gosāla, as 
we have seen, was an extreme determinist. Ajita Kesakambalin was an 
extreme materialist, whose doctrine was based on the four elements: ‘The 
pallbearers’ footfall can be heard as far as the cemetery. All alms-giving 
ends in ashes; the bare bones lie greying like pigeons.’ Pakudha Kaccāyana 
was an extreme vitalist, whose doctrine of seven elements added pleasure, 
pain and the life-principle (jīva, or élan vital) to earth, air, fire and water: 
‘When one chops off a man’s head with a sword, it is not so much depriving 
someone of life as inserting a blade into the intercalary space between 
these seven bodies.’ Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta was an extreme agnostic, or 
possibly eel-wriggling sceptic: ‘I don’t say it’s like this. And I don’t say it’s 
like that. And I don’t say it’s otherwise. And I don’t say it’s not so. And I 
don’t say it’s not not so.’ (q.v. Majjhima Nikāya, Sandaka Sutta [76:30]).
The teaching most nearly resembling the Buddha’s was that of his Jain 
rival, Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta (also known as Mahāvīra). He was born about 
a generation before Siddhattha Gotama in what is now the Indian state 
of Bihar; yet the two men seem never to have met. Despite superficial 
similarities in their doctrines of self-discipline, the extreme asceticism 
of the Jains was opposed to the Buddha’s Middle Way; and they found 
his doctrine of anattā positively pernicious. ‘Ford-finders’ (tīrthaṃkaras ) 
were among the official titles of Mahāvīra’s supposed twenty-three 
predecessors, implying that they helped others cross the turbulent ocean 
of phenomenal existence in their aspiration for moksha, liberation from 
cycles of rebirth.
30. ‘a renowned and famous ford-maker’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsakuludāyi 
Sutta (77:6).

NOTES

31. ‘the monk Gotama, the son of the Sakyans’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cankā Sutta 
(95:5).
32. ‘shattering ... the speculation of others’: Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1).
33. ‘wanderer would call on wanderer’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dīghanakha Sutta 
(74) and Sutta Nipāta 99.
34. ‘schismatic cousin Devadatta’: The Buddha appears to have had five 
first cousins among his disciples: Ānanda, his loyal attendant; Devadatta, 
his competitive alter ego (Yasodharā’s brother); the brothers Mahānāma 
and Anuruddha; and Tissa. For the Gotamakā, see Rhys Davids, Dialogues of 
the Buddha 1, pp. 71 and 221.
35. ‘as a hair-splitting marksman knows archery’: a phrase used by the 
wanderer Pilotika in Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷahatthipadopama Sutta (27:4-7); cf. 
King Pasedani, in Dhammacetiya Sutta (89:14).
36. ‘facing a Jain opponent’: Majjhima Nikāya, Upāli Sutta (56:10).
37. ‘If you agree with any statement of mine’: Majjhima Nikāya, Ghoṭamukha 
Sutta (94:4).
38. ‘this misguided man Samiddhi’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahākammavibhanga 
Sutta (136:4-5).
39. ‘while they abuse ... and rail at the tenets of others’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 
3:65.
40. ‘Even a dumb post, tackled by me’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka Sutta 
(35:2).
41. ‘washing the monk Gotama’: Majjhima Nikāya, Upāli Sutta (56:7).
42. ‘Sir, don’t put that point to Purāṇa Kassapa’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:6).
43. ‘Try wriggling out of that if you can’: See Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajala Sutta 
(1:1.18), repeated verbatim in Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2); again in Saṁyutta 
Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 56:9; and again here in the Wanderers’ Park at 
Rājagaha.
44. ‘The Udāna relates a notorious affair’: Udāna 4:8. Cf. ‘The Murder of 
Sundāri’ in the Dhammapada Commentary (Buddhist Legends, PTS III, 189).
45. ‘If that’s what the monk Gotama asserts’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka 
Sutta (35:4).

THE BROKEN GONG

46. ‘Sandaka in his cave’: Majjhima Nikāya, Sandaka Sutta (76:4). Both suttas 
76 and 77 give the same roll call of conversational topics. Cf. also Dīgha 
Nikāya, Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (9:3) and Udumbarika-Sīhanāda Sutta (25:2).
47. ‘we’d roll him over like an empty pot!’: Dīgha Nikāya , UdumbarikaSīhanāda Sutta (25:5 and 20).
48. ‘Since I am not a nihilist’: Majjhima Nikāya, Alagaddūpama Sutta (22:37). 
49. ‘“All-knowing” and “All-seeing”’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasakuludāyi Sutta 
(79:8) and Devadaha Sutta (101:10).
50. ‘Genuine Triple Knowledge’: a phrase by which Brahmans would have 
understood the Three Vedas, Majjhima Nikāya , Tevijjavacchagotta Sutta 
(71:6).
51. ‘blindly ignorant of health’: Majjhima Nikāya, Māgandiya Sutta (75:27).
52. ‘how to roar an authentic Lion’s Roar’: By the four monks the Buddha 
indicated the four stages of penetration into the Dhamma as ‘Streamwinner’ (Sotāpanna), ‘Once-returner’ (Sakadāgāmī), ‘Non-returner’ 
(Anāgāmī) and Arahant (literally ‘worthy one’), Majjhima Nikāya , 
Cūḷasīhanāda Sutta (11:2).
53. ‘We won’t renounce our teacher’s claims for that!’: Bhikkhu Bodhi 
proposes, ‘We are lost!’, as if disciples of the wanderer Sakuludayin felt 
slighted by this claim to a higher plane of consciousness than the third 
jhāna, Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasakuludāyi Sutta (79:26).
54. ‘the Kassapa-Sīhanāda Sutta’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (8:22).
55. ‘The “Greater Lion’s Roar” (Mahāsīhanāda Sutta)’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12).
56. ‘Master your faculties in harmony. Make that your aim’: Aṅguttara 
Nikāya 6:55. Cf. Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 5:1 [PTS vol. 4, 183].
57. ‘a weakness of will or want of self-control’: For Socrates, see especially 
Laches, Protagoras and Gorgias among the Platonic dialogues. Angulimāla 
(literally ‘he with the finger garland’), a notorious bandit who cut a finger 
from each of his victims to hang round his neck, was converted by the 
Buddha: Majjhima Nikāya, Angulimāla Sutta (86).
58. ‘Video meliora, proboque’: Ovid, Metamorphoses vii, 20.
59. ‘sadistic pleasure in inflicting harassment or pain’: for a list 
of some twenty-six contemporary tortures, see Majjhima Nikāya ,

NOTES

Mahādukkhakkhandha Sutta (13:14) and Bālapaṇḍita Sutta (129:4). For the 
Buddha’s recognition of sadistic and masochistic practices, see Kandaraka 
Sutta (51:5): ‘Pessa, there are four kinds of persons to be found existing in 
the world. What four? Here a person torments himself, being interested in 
self-torture. Here a person torments others, being interested in torturing 
others. Here a person both torments himself and torments others. 
Here a person neither torments himself nor torments others.’ For the 
Buddha’s own masochistic practices in his fakir days – using a mattress 
of spikes, feeding on his own excrement and urine – see Mahāsīhanāda 
Sutta (12:45-51).
60. Edgar Allan Poe: ‘The Imp of the Perverse’, 1845. Cf. also ‘The Man in 
the Crowd’, 1840.
61. ‘the Socratic ’ε′λεγχος ’: Or elenchos, by whose means Socrates was 
committed to showing up the obtuse, or bigoted, or self-contradictory 
notions of his fellow citizens.
62. ‘Virtue was the art of making oneself happy’: See Terence Irwin, Plato’s 
Moral Theory: The Early and Middle Dialogues (Oxford University Press, 1977) 
and Plato’s Ethics (Oxford University Press, 1996).
63. ‘five basic precepts’: known as the Pañca Sila.
64. ‘for the sake of its reflection, sir’: Paccavekkhanattho, literally ‘looking 
to see any blemishes in the face’, Majjhima Nikāya, Ambalaṭṭhika Rāhulovāda 
Sutta (61:8).
65. ‘without resentment, forgiving the faults of all’: Cf. ‘Even should bandits 
savagely sever limb from limb with a two-handled saw, he who harboured 
hate in his heart on that account would not be carrying out my teaching,’ 
Majjhima Nikāya, Kakacūpama Sutta (21:25).
66. ‘No evil can befall a good man’: Plato, Apology 40d.
67. ‘wisdom and virtue ... in a life correctly lived’: The impact a 
‘philosopher’ made on others was measured as much by his daily conduct 
as by his teaching; or, depending on his auditors, as much by his doctrine 
as his life. For philosophy was still inseparable from a way of life: it meant 
not only having a system but living in conformity with it. To imitate 
Socrates (or the Buddha), therefore, was less a matter of resolving intricate 
problems than of recreating oneself. Both Socrates and the Buddha 
ultimately taught, not knowledge exactly, but a realization that – knowing 
nothing – the main thing for us to learn is how to take care of ourselves.

THE BROKEN GONG

Cf. Alexander Nehamas, The Art of Living: Socratic Reflections from Plato to 
Foucault (University of California Press, 1999).
68. ‘Plato’s Theory of Forms ... and his belief in the pre-existence of the soul’: 
for the doctrine of recollection (ἀνα′μνησις), see the Meno and Phaedo; for 
the interdependence of the Theory of Forms and transmigration of souls, 
see Phaedo 76e.
69. ‘the Buddha and ... Socrates shared much common ground’: Even 
physically and socially, they had something in common: both husbands 
and fathers; both tough, wandering about barefoot, indifferent to cold or 
heat; both open to public engagement with anyone they met.
70. ‘What you said earlier does not tally with what you said later’: Majjhima 
Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka Sutta (35:17).
71. ‘On spotting broad hoof-tracks’: Majjhima Nikāya , Cūḷahatthipadopama 
Sutta (27:12).
72. ‘though badly argued, may still be factually correct’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Cankī Sutta’ (95:14-15).
73. ‘You may be puzzled, Kālāmas’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:65.
74. ‘Suppose a man came here brandishing a sword’: Majjhima Nikāya, Upāli 
Sutta (56:13).
75. ‘Only natural, ordinary impulses’: ‘Socrates faict mouvoir son ame d’un 
mouvement naturel et commun. Ainsi dict un païsan, ainsi dict une femme. 
Il n’a jamais en la bouche que cochers, menuisiers, savetiers et maçons. Ce 
sont inductions et similitudes tirées des plus vulgaires et cogneues actions 
des hommes: chacun l’entend. Sous une si vile forme nous n’eussions 
jamais choisi la noblesse et splendeur de ses conceptions admirables ...’ 
Montaigne, Essais, Book III, 12, ‘On Physiognomy’.
76. ‘Suppose, Anuruddha, a man set out on a journey’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Upakkilesa Sutta (128:20-24).
77. ‘Imagine a man blind from birth’: Majjhima Nikāya, Subha Sutta (99:12); 
cf. also Māgandiya Sutta (75:27-29) and Dīgha Nikāya, Pāyāsi Sutta (23:11).
78. ‘abstains from dancing, singing, music’: Majjhima Nikāya , Kandaraka 
Sutta (51:16).
79. ‘nothing but hymns to the gods and encomia for the good’: Plato, 
Republic X. Further hints can be gleaned from more scattered remarks.

NOTES

The Guards’ musical education, it seems, also included some dancing, the 
singing of lyric poetry at symposia, as well as of new songs in general (as 
long as they were composed in traditional styles). Resident poets would be 
responsible for sacred hymns (at festivals, sacrifices, wedding ceremonials, 
etc.) as well as poems for distinguished citizens. Epic poetry, unlike the 
Iliad and the Odyssey, would have to consist of entirely unvarnished, 
undramatized, third-person narrative. See M. F. Burnyeat, ‘Culture and 
Society in Plato’s “Republic”’, Tanner Lectures on Human Values, vol. XX 
(Harvard University Press, 1998).
80. ‘no understanding of what is, only of what appears’: Plato, Republic X.
81. ‘no earthly bard has ever yet sung’: Plato, Phaedrus.
82. ‘volitional acts to a banana-stem’: Literally ‘plantain-stem’, shedding 
frond from frond without a central trunk or core, Saṁyutta Nikāya  III 
[Khandhavagga] 22:95.
83. ‘the germ of a man who is to become a philosopher, or aesthete’: Plato, 
Phaedrus.
84. ‘True philosophers make dying their profession’: In Montaigne’s 
paraphrase: ‘Que philosopher, c’est apprendre à mourir’ (1580).
85. ‘apart from yogic self-discipline’: Siddhattha Gotama, as samaṇa, had two 
yogis as masters: Āḷārā Kālāma, who reached the Sphere of Nothingness, 
and Uddaka Rāmaputta, who reached the sphere of Neither Perception nor 
Non-Perception in the Formless World.
86. ‘in part a decoy, a dissimulation’: simulatio is the Latin for ‘irony’.
87. ‘in the world Arahant and Fully Enlightened’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Vatthūpama Sutta (7:6), Cūḷahatthipadopama Sutta (27:13) and Dantabhūmi 
Sutta (125:13).
88. ‘the leper ... scratching the scabs off his sores’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Māgandiya Sutta (75:18-22).
89. ‘the unquenchable flames of the Fire Sermon’: Given at Gayāsīsa, 
as spiritual confirmation of three fire-worshipping ascetics and their 
numerous disciples who had tossed their coiled braids into the river 
Nerañjarā as a sign of conversion, Mahāvagga 1:7-21 and Saṁyutta Nikāya 
IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:28.
90. ‘the Parable of the Malūva’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷadhammasamādāna Sutta 
(45:4). See ch. 5, pp. 130-132.

THE BROKEN GONG

91. ‘all else is “vulgar lechery”’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dantabhūmi Sutta (125:16).
92. ‘Relying on craving, one should abandon craving’: Aṅguttara Nikāya  
4:145.
93. ‘no forms, sounds, odours, flavours’: Majjhima Nikāya, Naggaravindeyya 
Sutta (150:6).
94. ‘a tree-root, a rock, a ravine’: Majjhima Nikāya, Kandaraka Sutta (51:18).
95. ‘quiet and undisturbed by voices ... secluded in retreat’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Dhammacetiya Sutta (89:4).
96. ‘puppies ... pulling to pieces whatever happened to be near them’: Plato, 
Republic.
97. ‘breaking up families and obliterating the clans’: Vinaya-piṭaka: 
Mahāvagga 1:23 [PTS vol. 4, 43]. 
98. ‘without their parents’ consent’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 1:54 [PTS vol. 
4, 83].
99. ‘at a wedding-feast, transformed by death into a soaring swan’: 
Diogenes Laertius, in Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, quotes a lost 
biography of Hermippus as his authority for Plato’s death at a weddingfeast for his great-nephew and heir, Adeimantus. Olympiodorus relates 
Plato’s dream of himself as a swan in flight three nights before his death. 
Pausanias, visiting his grave in the garden of the Academy, saw the swan 
carved on his tombstone.
3. THE MENACE OF ART
1. ‘the Dasārahas owned a summoning-drum’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  II 
[Nidānasaṁyutta] 20:7. The second paragraph, on the inevitable 
degeneracy of the Sangha, is repeated word for word in Aṅguttara Nikāya 
3:107. This is probably the sutta on ‘Future Dangers’ mentioned by the 
Emperor Aśoka in his Bhabra Edict.
2. ‘an “eminently structured object”’: ‘Image fréquente: celle du vaisseau 
Argo (lumineux et blanc), dont les Argonautes remplaçaient peu à peu 
chaque pièce, en sorte qu’ils eurent pour finir un vaisseau entierèment 
nouveau, sans avoir à en changer le nom ni la forme. Ce vaisseau Argo est 
bien utile: il fournit l’allégorie d’un objet éminemment structural ... Argo 
est un objet sans autre cause que son nom, sans autre identité que sa forme,’ 
Roland Barthes par Roland Barthes  (Paris, Editions du Seuil, 1975), p. 50.

NOTES

3. ‘the Japanese Sun Goddess ... at Ise’: ‘l’antico é ció the perpetua il suo 
disegno attraverso il continuo distruggersi e rinnovarsi degli elementi 
perituri ...; cosí i versi d’una poesia si tramandano nel tempo mentre la 
carta delle pagine su cui saranno via via trascritti va in polvere’, Italo 
Calvino, Collezione di Sabbia (Rome, 1984), p. 171 ff.
4. ‘the imperceptible and constant ... wearing away of all things’: Such as 
a carpenter’s tools by his finger and thumb-prints, or a ship’s rigging by 
sunshine and rain, see Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:101.
5. ‘a thunder-wielding spirit, with an iron bolt through its head’: Majjhima 
Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka Sutta (35:14).
6. ‘The Blessed One saw the thunder-spirit and so did Saccaka’: Just as, in a 
parallel irruption, both the Buddha and a conceited young Brahman could 
see a fiery yakkha. For Ambaṭṭha was emotionally blocked in much the 
same way as Saccaka, except this time the crux being excessive ancestral 
pride. Again, the same warning was sounded: 
‘Whoever ... doesn’t answer a basic question put to him by a Tathāgata at 
the third time of asking has his head split into seven pieces’:
‘And at that moment Vajirapāni the Yakkha, wielding a huge iron club 
that blazed into the sky above Ambaṭṭha’s head, echoed: “If this youth 
Ambaṭṭha doesn’t answer a fair question put to him by the Blessed Lord at 
the third time of asking, I’ll split his skull into seven pieces!” The Lord saw 
Vajirapāni and so did Ambaṭṭha, who was so shattered by this apparition 
that his hair stood on end and, crouching close to the Lord, he whispered: 
“What did the Reverend Gotama say? May the Reverend Gotama repeat 
what he said!”.’ (Dīgha Nikāya, Ambaṭṭha Sutta [3:1.20-1.21]).
And so capitulates by admitting what had, for so long, been obstinately 
repressed.
7. ‘The goddess standing behind Peleus’ son’: Homer, Iliad, book 1, lines 
197-200 and 219-222, translated by Richmond Lattimore (University of 
Chicago Press, 1951).
8. ‘trivialized the Dhammaniyāna’: Or Law of Nature, Aṅguttara Nikāya , 
Uppāda Sutta (3:136).
9. ‘Suppose someone in search of heartwood’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka 
Sutta (35:22).
10. ‘whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood’: Majjhima 
Nikāya, Cūḷasāropama Sutta (30:3-7).

THE BROKEN GONG

11. ‘this discourse of Master Gotama, divested of branches and foliage’: 
Majjhima Nikāya, Aggivacchagotta Sutta (72:20).
12. ‘There is no virtue even in many thousands of stanzas’: Dhammapada 
Commentary ii, 216; Udāna 8-9.
13. ‘then Dhamma-teaching does occur to the Tathāgata’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 
10:154-155.
14. ‘neither flattered nor berated that audience’: Majjhima Nikāya, Brahmāyu 
Sutta (91:21).
15. ‘distinct, intelligible, melodious ... sonorous’: Cf. the Sanskrit Mahāvastu, 
i. 315,
‘Penetrating and flowing is his speech, 
In the high, the low and the middle tone, 
Correct in measure and in sound, and pure; 
Such is this perfect eloquence.’
16. ‘that same sign for concentration in which I constantly abide’: Majjhima 
Nikāya, Mahāsaccaka Sutta (36:45). For ‘sign for concentration’ (samādhinimittā), see also Mahāsuññata Sutta (122). In the Cūḷavedalla Sutta (44:12), it 
is defined as the ‘four foundations of mindfulness’.
17. ‘Elation arose in me’: Majjhima Nikāya, Upakkilesa Sutta (128:21).
18. ‘Let us render the words of the Buddha into classical metre’: Cullavagga 
5:33.
19, 20 & 21. ‘capped six stanzas ... played variations ... a soliloquized 
rebuke’: Majjhima Nikāya, Vāseṭṭha Sutta (98:7), Vatthūpama Sutta (7:27) and 
Upakkilesa Sutta (128:7). See ch. 7, pp. 247, 277, 278.
22. ‘Of four different kinds of poets’: ‘What four? The imaginative, the 
didactic, the extempore and the traditional’, Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:231.
23. ‘the unities of Truth and of Right are not broken by the disguise’: 
Emerson, ‘Illusions’, The Conduct of Life (1860).
24. ‘The imagination, bhikkhus, is a disease’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  
[Saḷāyatanavagga], Vepacitti Sutta, 35:248. Maññita derives from the root 
man, ‘to think’; so Maññanā, ‘thinking in terms of sense-data’, or ‘imagining’.
25. ‘the “Honey-Ball”, or “Sweetmeat”  Sutta’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Madhupiṇḍaka Sutta (18:22). The Buddha accepted the compliment, surely, 
because it was Mahā-Kaccāna whom Ānanda was really praising. Mahā-

NOTES

Kaccāna’s explication of a single phrase of the Buddha’s (‘the evaluation of 
diversifying perceptions’) forms the main body of the text.
26. ‘“conceptual proliferation”’: papañca is the divisive, splintering effect of 
all perception and thinking: ‘What a man feels, that he perceives. What he 
perceives, that he thinks about. What he thinks about, that he diversifies ... 
When the phenomenon of perceiving lapses, the phenomenon of thinking 
too becomes untenable. When the phenomenon of thinking lapses, the 
sense of being beset by an ever-branching, evaluative multiplication 
of conceptions at once becomes untenable as well.’ (Majjhima Nikāya , 
Madhupiṇḍaka Sutta 18:16 and 18.)
27. ‘In the seen, there will just be the seen’: The Buddha’s exhortation to 
Bāhiya Dārucīriya, Udāna, Bodhivagga.
28. ‘Just as a skilled joiner ... might knock out and extract a blunt peg’: 
Majjhima Nikāya, Vitakkasaṇṭhāna Sutta (20:3).
29. ‘so readily duplicated by conscious displacements’: Until the vagaries 
of an alert imagination are under such tight control that a monk will at all 
times ‘think the thoughts that he wishes, and will not think the thoughts 
that he does not wish’, ibid. (20:8).
30. ‘a sustained deconceptualization of the mind’: See Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, 
Concept and Reality, pp. 27-28, quoting Dīgha Nikāya, Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (9).
31. ‘No games, no gaming, no sport’: Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1:1.131.14). The list has been somewhat trimmed. Ball-games were played, 
apparently, with an iron ball. Not only cocks, bulls and elephants were set 
up for public fights, but also buffalo, horses, goats, rams and quail. Monks 
were expressly forbidden to play brass instruments or join in military 
tattoos.
32. ‘dancing, singing, music and theatrical shows’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Kandaraka Sutta (51:16).
33. ‘Devotion to the sign of beauty’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 10:72.
34. ‘Have you ever seen an elaborate painting?’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  III 
[Khandhavagga] 22:100.
35. ‘complexity of mind in its creative urge’: All this, and more, is implied 
in the syncretic term saṇkhāra: the constructive, formative, determinant 
mental activity.

THE BROKEN GONG

36. ‘Even our appearance ... is the product of our imagination’: The Pali 
word ‘bimba’, meaning an ‘image’ or ‘reflection’, is primarily associated 
with the human form. See Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 5:9.
37. ‘forms of self-infatuation and self-entrapment’: Cf. the dialogue between 
the Venerable Rādha and the Buddha: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
23:2. See ch. 7, pp. 177-178.
38. ‘a king ... who has never heard the sound of a lute’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:246.
39. ‘Once upon a time, a trumpeter visited a frontier district’: One of 
thirteen parables in the extended dialogue between Prince Pāyāsi and the 
Venerable Kumāra Kassapa on the question of life after death, Dīgha Nikāya, 
Pāyāsi Sutta (23:19). The trumpet (sanka) was, literally, a ‘conch-shell’.
40. ‘a skilled potter ... were to produce ... whatever shape of pot’: Dīgha 
Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:87), Sampasādanīya Sutta (28:18) and Majjhima 
Nikāya, Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:31).
41. ‘that degree of psychic power ... Great is the psychic power’: Vinaya -
piṭaka: Cullavagga 7:1-2 [PTS vol. 5, 183, 185].
42. ‘Owing to special attainments’: Itivuttaka 85-87. Cf. the Buddha’s rebuke 
to Pindola for showing off his psychic powers, ‘Just as a prostitute displays 
her underwear’, Cullavagga 5 (111-112).
43. ‘fifty Nālandas ... to ashes with one mental act of hate’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Upāli Sutta (56:8 and 13).
44. ‘the magical arts called respectively “Gandhāra” and “Maṇikā”’: Dīgha 
Nikāya, Kevaddha Sutta (11:5).
4. THE FORCE OF IMAGERY
1. ‘a Brahman household with its food-offerings’: See Aṅguttara Nikāya 6:42.
2. ‘local worthies “arriving in state-coaches”’: Eminent Licchavis, Aṅguttara 
Nikāya 10:72. 
3. ‘a thorn to meditation’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:80. 
4. ‘the figures of the seedling and the young calf’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cātumā 
Sutta (67:7-11).
5. ‘Can it be done, Lord, with a simile?’: Of ‘aeons passed and gone by’, 
Saṁyutta Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 15:8.

NOTES

6. ‘A simile occurs to me’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka Sutta (35:10 and 27).
7. and 8. ‘Now there came to me spontaneously ...’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:50), Mahāsaccaka Sutta (36:17), Bodhirājakumāra Sutta 
(85:15) and Saṅgārava Sutta (100:14).
9. ‘How should these two similes occur to me?’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dantabhūmi 
Sutta (125:11). Cf. Bhūmija Sutta (126:19).
10. ‘known as Vulture Peak Rock’: ‘On one occasion I was living at Rājagaha 
on the Vulture Peak Rock’, Majjhima Nikāya , Cūḷadukkhakkhandha Sutta 
(14:15).
11. ‘with the help of a simile intelligent people’: Aṅguttara Nikāya  10:95. 
This explanatory clause is an oral filler repeated, for example, in Majjhima 
Nikāya, Mahāvedalla Sutta (43:22) and Sandaka Sutta (76:60).
12. ‘repeated verbatim by Sāriputta: Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (16:1.17) and Sampasādanīya Sutta (28:2); also Saṁyutta Nikāya  V 
[Mahāvagga] 47:12. 
13. ‘As Nāgasena declared’: To King Milinda: ‘If any man shall ask me 
a question involving Readiness in Speaking, to him I shall explain one 
exposition by another exposition ...’ Milindapañha V, ‘A Question Solved 
by Inference’ [PTS 339]. The ‘Questions of Milinda’ is a non-canonical 
collection of (probably imaginary) dialogues between Menander, King of 
Bactria (c. 150-110 BCE), and the sage Nāgasena. If conducted in Greek, the 
debate must have been later translated into Pali.
14. ‘The Great Khan deciphered the signs’: Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities 
(1972), translated by William Weaver (London: Secker & Warburg, 1974), 
part 1, conclusion and part 2, conclusion.
15. ‘Wat Pah Nanachat’: near Ubon Rajathani in northeast Thailand.
16. ‘cut off at the root, like a palm-tree stump’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Aggivacchagotta Sutta (72:19); Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:36.
17. ‘an odd protuberance from the cranium’: It was the Gandhāra sculptors, 
familiar with Greek deities in human form, who invented the Buddhaimage: often moustached, with protuberant top-knot, elongated earlobes 
and an occasional suggestion of a Third Eye. Usually standing, their 
figures are draped in a roman toga and shod in African sandals planted 
on acanthus leaves. Excavations at Taxila, east of the Khyber Pass, in the 
1920s proved that this Hellenized Bactrian and Scythian school lasted from

THE BROKEN GONG

the first century BCE, through the Kushan period, to the fifth century CE. 
See John Boardman, The Diffusion of Classical Art in Antinquity (Thames and 
Hudson, 1994).
18. ‘Thirty-two ... “Marks of a Great Man”’: See Dīgha Nikāya Ambaṭṭha Sutta 
(3:1.3-1.5), Mahāpadāna Sutta (14:1.32) and Lakkhaṇa Sutta (30, passim).
19. ‘his tongue ... could lick both ear-holes’: ‘Then the Blessed One 
extended his tongue and repeatedly touched both ear-holes, both nostrils, 
and covered the whole of his forehead with his tongue’, Majjhima Nikāya, 
Brahmāyu Sutta (91:7 and 30) and Sela Sutta (92:14).
20. ‘wheels with a thousand spokes’: Majjhima Nikāya, Brahmāyu Sutta (91:9) 
and Aṅguttara Nikāya’ 4:36.
21. ‘Even his male member’: The Brahman student Uttara and his master 
saw ‘what should be hidden by a cloth enclosed in a sheath’ (Majjhima 
Nikāya, Brahmāyu Sutta [91]); the Brahman Seta too saw ‘the male organ 
enclosed by a sheath’ (Majjhima Nikāya, Sela Sutta [92]); as did the youth 
Ambaṭṭha and his Brahman master (Dīgha Nikāya , Ambaṭṭha Sutta [3:2.112.12 and 2.18-2.19]). Naturally this roused curiosity in later generations 
and the subject was resuscitated in the Milindapañha IV, ‘The Dilemmas’, 
3.3 [PTS 167-168].
22. ‘the “memoria technical” of the Renaissance’: Derived from Greek and 
Roman precedents. See Frances A. Yates, Theatre of the World (1969).
23. ‘Chariot-according-to-the-Dhamma’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 
4:36. See ch. 1, note 31.
24. ‘elevenfold characteristics of a good herdsman’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāgopālaka Sutta (3:15).
25. ‘how do barley reapers reap the barley?’: Milindapañha II, ‘Distinguishing 
Marks’ 8 [PTS 33].
26. ‘a black and a white ox bound together by one rope’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:232.
27. ‘as utterly pure and polished as a conch-shell’: e.g. Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāsaccaka Sutta (36:12 and 100) and Saṅgārava Sutta (100:9).
28. ‘the Fire Sermon, preached at Gayā Scarp’: Where Kassapa of Uruvēla, 
Kassapa of the River and Kassapa of Gaya, with their thousand followers, 
tossed their coiled braids and ‘implements for fire-worship’ into the River 
Nerañjarā. See ch. 2, note 90.

NOTES

29. ‘Just as the great ocean has only one taste’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:19-20. 
See ch. 1, note 30.
30. ‘coming across honeycake’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:194. The Buddha himself 
had allowed the Madhupiṇḍaka Sutta ( Majjhima Nikāya, Madhupiṇḍika Sutta 
[18]) to be entitled the ‘Honey-Ball’ or ‘Sweetmeat’ Sutta. See ch. 3, note 25.
31. ‘a fast walker’: Majjhima Nikāya, Vitakkasaṇṭhāna Sutta (20:6).
32. ‘a herdsman must tap and poke his cows’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dvedhāvitakka 
Sutta (19:7).
33. ‘a banyan overrun by creepers’: ‘Moisture-born and self-begotten ... like 
the Māluvā-creeper entwining the forest’, Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 
10:3.
34. ‘a farmer with a large plough’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
22:102.
35. ‘Master Gotama praised meditation in many a figure’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Gopakamoggallāna Sutta (108:25).
36. ‘as the seed, so the fruit’: ‘Yādisam vapate bījaṃ/ Tādisaṃ labhate phalaṃ’, 
Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 11:10.
37. ‘a margosa seed ... a sugar-cane seed’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 1:32.
38. ‘His body was as big as a boat’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 4:6.
39. ‘as the cartwheel follows the ox’s hoof’: Linked inextricably step by 
step, Dhammapada 1-2.
40. ‘hot coals ... freshly squeezed milk’: Dhammapada 71.
41. ‘Just as a carpenter’s adze ... or sea-going boat’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  III 
[Khandhavagga] 22:101. See ch. 3, note 4. Cf. the metamorphosis of milk, 
ch. 1, pp. 4-5.
42. ‘Remove one sheaf and the other will fall’: To suggest the 
interdependence of consciousness (viññāṇa ) supporting nāma-rūpa and 
nāma-rūpa supporting consciousness, Saṁyutta Nikāya [Nidānavagga] 12:67. 
See ch. 1, p. 19.
43. ‘the leper “with sores and abscesses”’: Majjhima Nikāya, Māgandiya Sutta 
(75:18-22). See ch. 2, p. 57.
44. ‘Coleridge labelled “esemplastic”’: Coleridge, Biographia Literaria, ch. 13, 
‘On the imagination, or esemplastic power’ (1817).

THE BROKEN GONG

45. ‘like the moon appearing from behind a cloud’: Dhammapada 172.
46. ‘a sick man not returning to his vomit’: Majjhima Nikāya, Sunakkhatta 
Sutta (105:11, 13, 15 and 17).
47. ‘As the rafters of a house ... lead up to the ridge-pole’: Milindapañha II, 
‘Distinguishing Marks’, 13.
48. ‘Just as the beams of a sloping roof all rise’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  II 
[Nidānavagga] 20:1.
49. ‘Builder, you’ve been seen!’: Dhammapada 154. See ch. 1, pp. 14-15.
50. ‘For countless births I wandered’: Dhammapada 153.
51. ‘Just as an old worn-out cart’: Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāparinibbāna Sutta 
(16:2.25).
52. ‘positive freedom ... and negative freedom’: Isaiah Berlin’s dichotomy 
from ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’, Inaugural Lecture at the University of 
Oxford, 31 October 1958.
53. ‘Suppose a man borrowed a loan’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahā-Assapura Sutta 
(39:14). See also Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:69-73), addressed to 
King Ajātasattu of Magadha.
54. ‘Therefore let yourself ... be your refuge’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (16:2.26).
55. ‘The ocean! The ocean!’: Saṁyutta IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:232.
56. ‘how many wonders do the Asuras’: Like the Greek Titans, the Asuras 
were engaged in constant battle with the gods (or devas). They dwelt in 
the ocean with the nāgas (dragons or sea-serpents), Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:19.
57. ‘a widespread fascination with cryptic meanings’: Such as the 
interpretation of dreams, deciphered in the same doctrinal manner, 
Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:196.
5. ALLEGORY AND PARABLE
1. ‘Self-sufficient they lurk ... within the very reality’: ‘A Symbol ... always 
partakes of the Reality which it renders intelligible; and while it enunciates 
the whole, abides itself as a living part in that Unity, of which it is the 
representative’: Coleridge, Lay Sermons: The Statesman’s Manual (1816).
2. ‘aesthetic presentation framed “almost at will”’: See Hannah Arendt, 
Introduction to Walter Benjamin, Illuminations (London: Cape, 1970), p. 13.

NOTES

3. ‘its pervasive dualism of “meaning and reality”’: Walter Benjamin, The 
Origin of German Tragic Drama, translated by John Osborne (London: New 
Left Books, 1977), p. 194. See ‘Allegory and Trauerspiel’, pp. 159-235, passim.
4. ‘like this insubstantial pageant faded’: Shakespeare, The Tempest, Act IV, 
155-156.
5. ‘which cannot be stopped by a monk, or Brahman’: Vinaya-piṭaka: 
Mahāvagga 1:6 [PTS vol. 4, 12].  See the sculptured reliefs from Amārāvāti, 
now in the British Museum. Bharahut, Bodh Gayā and Sanchi are other 
early precincts especially rich in emblematic representations of the 
Buddha.
6. ‘Just as a blue or red or white lotus’: Aṅguttara Nikāya  4:36. For the 
padumam lotus, see also the Sutta Nipāta: ‘Even as a drop of water besmears 
neither lotus-leaf nor lotus-flower ...’ (812); and ‘even as the white lotus is 
sullied neither by water nor mud ...’ (845).
7. ‘the impossibility for the language of poetry to appropriate anything’: 
Paul de Man, Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche, 
Rilke, and Proust (Yale University Press, 1980).
8. ‘surgeon-physician’: ‘The “surgeon’s probe” is a term for mindfulness 
[sāti]; his “knife”, for Noble Wisdom [paññā] ... draining the wound of “pus” 
[or ignorance]’, Majjhima Nikāya, Sunakkhatta Sutta (105:27).
9. ‘pioneer “of the undiscovered way”’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
22:58.
10. ‘head of a caravan’: ‘Satthavāha’, Nidāna I, 446.
11. ‘a yokel directing travellers’: Majjhima Nikāya, Gaṇakamoggallāna Sutta 
(107:14).
12. ‘Take the right-hand fork’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:84. 
13. ‘a forested range, home to a herd of deer’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dvedhāvitakka 
Sutta (19:25).
14. ‘a watchful sāti ... as keeper of the single gate’: As Sāriputta concluded in 
the Sampasādanīya Sutta (Dīgha Nikāya, 28.2): ‘In the same way, venerable sir, 
I have come to possess knowledge by inference from personal experience 
(dhammanvaya ñāṇa)’; or (at Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 47:12): ‘So, too, 
Lord, a certainty about the Dhamma is known to me.’ See ch. 4, note 13.

THE BROKEN GONG

15. ‘Zen masters ... the “Gateless Gate”’: The Wu-men Kuan, or Mumonkan 
in Japanese: a collection of 48 Tang kōans with a commentary by the Sung 
master Wu-men (1183-1260), Mumon in Japanese, edited and translated 
by Robert Aitken in The Gateless Barrier (San Francisco: North Point Press, 
1990).
16. ‘With entire mindfulness he breathes in’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna 
Sutta (22:244).
17. ‘True, mindfulness may occasionally lapse’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:244. 
18. ‘Great King! It’s just as when ...’: Dīgha Nikāya , Sāmaññaphala Sutta 
(2:75-98) (addressed to King Ajātasattu of Magadha). In Pali, the blue, red 
and white lotuses are the uppala, paduma and puṇḍarika varieties. Cf. also 
Majjhima Nikāya, Mahā-Assapura Sutta (39) and Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77).
19. ‘one “bathed with the inner bathing”’: Majjhima Nikāya , Vatthūpama 
Sutta (7:25).
20. ‘pleasure that has nothing to do with sensual desires’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Bodhirājakumāra Sutta (85:32). Cf. Cūḷadukkhakkhandha Sutta (14:5).
21. ‘unremitting pleasure’: Majjhima Nikāya , Cūḷadukkhakkhandha Sutta 
(14:23). Cf. Cūḷasakuludāyi Sutta (79:27).
22. ‘one should not be afraid of such pleasure, I say’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Laṭukikopama Sutta (66:24). For a hedonistic calculus (maximizing pleasure 
and minimizing pain) based on a ready-reckoner of two, three, five, six, 
eighteen, thirty-six and one-hundred-and-eight different ‘kinds of feeling’, 
see Majjhima Nikāya, Bahuvedanīya Sutta (59:5).
23. ‘Friends, it’s like a soiled cloth’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
22:89.
24. ‘But their moral value remains mysterious’: See Mahā-Moggallāna’s 
‘Dhamma talk on the marvels of psychic power’ given to the five hundred 
schismatic monks abducted by Devadatta: Vinaya-piṭaka, Cullavagga 7:4 
[PTS vol. 5, 198-201].
25. ‘the artistry of potters ... for psychic power’: See ch. 3, pp. 74-76 [80-82 
in original].
26. ‘in the heat of the dry season a parched and exhausted traveller’: 
Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:42) and Cūḷa-Assapura Sutta (40:13).

NOTES

27. ‘the lesson of the five bowls of water’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 
45:55.
28. ‘At sunrise, when the sun’s rays ...’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  V [Mahāvagga] 
48:42; cf. also II [Nidānavagga] 12:64.
29. ‘a bull’s hide ... freed from folds’: Majjhima Nikāya , Cūḷasuññata Sutta 
(121:5).
30. ‘a king’s chest ... so packed with gorgeous robes’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāgosinga Sutta (32:9).
31. ‘Alagaddūpama Sutta ... Potaliya Sutta’: Majjhima Nikāya , Alagaddūpama 
Sutta (22:3-8) and Potaliya Sutta (54:15-21).
32. ‘kernels, or remnants, or memos, of familiar stories’: See ch. 8, pp. 287288.
33. ‘the seventh ... as odd man out’: The final three similes, I suspect, were 
later additions: the ‘slaughterhouse’ (number eight) echoes the ‘bones’ and 
‘lump of flesh’; the piercing ‘palisade’ (number nine) parallels the ‘pit of 
burning coals’; the ‘snake’s head’ (number ten) is a warning to tread warily.
For the association of sensuality with raw meat, compare the monk whom 
the Buddha saw loitering, on his alms-round, near a fig-tree in Benares. 
‘Bhikkhu! Bhikkhu!’ he called, ‘on him who is rotten and reeks with the 
stench of carrion the flies will surely settle ... they cannot fail to do so,’ 
Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:128.
34. ‘Imagine a tree blossoming’: In another version, the tree ‘abounds in 
fruit’. But risking life and limb for flowers seems even more reckless than 
plundering fruit.
35. ‘that seeing they may see, and not perceive’: Mark 4:12.
36. ‘In the words of one Gnostic master’: Monoimus quoted by his student 
Hippolytus, a Greek-speaking Christian in Rome (c. 225 CE). Hippolytus 
had heard of Brahman gnosis, ‘through which the secret mysteries are 
perceived by the wise’, perhaps from Buddhist missionaries proselytizing 
in Alexandria. See Edward Conze, ‘Buddhism and Gnosis’, in Le Origini dello 
Gnosticismo (Leiden: Brill, 1967).
37. ‘According to the Gospel of Thomas’: 45:29-33 and 50:28-30. Cf. the 
author of the Treatise on Resurrection to his student Rheginos: ‘Do not 
think of resurrection as an illusion [ɸαντασι ́α]. It is not an illusion, but 
truth ... Indeed, it is more accurate to call the world an illusion ... It is the

THE BROKEN GONG

revelation of what is, and the transformation of things, and a transition 
into newness ... Why not consider yourself risen and [already] brought to 
this?’ (47.18-49.24). Cf. also the opening claim of the Apocryphon of John, 
that it will reveal ‘the mysteries (and the) things hidden in silence’ (1:2-3), 
with the opening of the Gospel of Thomas: ‘These are the secret words which 
the living Jesus spoke ...’
38. ‘the ur-evangelist, Mark ... allegorizing a parable’: The Parable of the 
Sower, 4:14-20.
39. ‘the mystery of the kingdom of God’: Mark 4:11-12.
40. ‘two other allegorical interpretations ... by an evangelist’: The Parable 
of the Tares and Parable of the Dragnet, both in Matthew 13.
41. ‘a Hellenistic aberration’: Just as allegorical interpretations of Olympian 
myths were Philo’s model for his treatment of biblical stories.
42. ‘parables ... as esoteric vehicles for mystification’: See Frank Kermode: 
‘The whole passage about seeing and hearing comes from Isaiah (6:9-10), 
though Mark, in paraphrasing it, does not say so. What Matthew does 
is to quote Isaiah directly and with acknowledgement, so that the lines 
retain a trace of their original tone of slightly disgusted irony’ (The Genesis 
of Secrecy, Harvard University Press, 1979, ch. 2, p. 30). Yet elsewhere 
Matthew, too, strikes a distinctly gnostic note. When asked by his disciples 
why he spoke only in parables, he replied: ‘Because it is given unto you to 
know the mysteries [μυστη ́ρια] of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it 
is not given’ (13:11).
The Gnostic leader and poet Valentinus (c. 140 CE), who had travelled 
from Egypt to teach in Rome, claimed to have learned Paul’s secret 
teachings (‘unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter’, 
2 Corinthians 12:4) from Theudas, one of Paul’s disciples. See Irenaeus, 
Bishop of Lyon (c. 180 CE), in his Libros Quinque Adversus Haereses, a polemic 
for ‘The Destruction and Overthrow of Falsely So-called Gnosis’.
43. ‘no “teacher’s closed fist”’: In conversation with Ānanda, shortly before 
his death, Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.25) and Saṁyutta Nikāya 
V [Mahāvagga] 47:9.
44. ‘a stage for human craving ... rage ... and delusion’: In Pali, the three 
categories of mental defilement are lobha/rāga (greed/lust), dosa/kodha 
(hatred/anger) and moha (delusion).

NOTES

45. ‘the Parable of the Talents’: Matthew 25:14-30 and Luke 19:12-27. Other 
parables appearing in several, if not all three, of the Synoptic Gospels are 
located here by a single reference: The Unforgiving Servant, Matthew 
18:23-35; The Unjust Steward, Luke 16:1-8; The Labourers in the Vineyard, 
Matthew 20:1-16; The Wicked Husbandmen, Mark 12:1-9; The Good 
Samaritan, Luke 10:30-37; The Ten Virgins, Matthew 25:1-13; The Prodigal 
Son, Luke 15:11-32.
46. ‘Well, Prince, consider this parable’: Kūmara-Kassapa to convince 
Prince Pāyāsi that there is life after death: Dīgha Nikāya, Pāyāsi Sutta (23:9), 
introducing a set of thirteen parables.
47. ‘A parable, monks, I gave to you’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dvedhāvitakka Sutta 
(19:26).
48. ‘Hebrew mashal, meaning “riddle”’: See Frank Kermode: ‘Sometimes the 
Greek word is also used to translate hidah, meaning “riddle”. Riddle and 
parable may be much the same’, The Genesis of Secrecy, ch. 2, p. 23.
49. ‘one single point of comparison’: C. H. Dodd, in the wake of Adolph 
Julicher, Rudolf Bultmann and A. T. Cadoux, The Parables of the Kingdom 
(James Nisbet, 1935), p. 18.
50. ‘entices the hearer to a judgment’: C. H. Dodd, p. 21.
51. ‘Go, and do thou likewise’: Concluding the Parable of the Good 
Samaritan, Luke 10:37.
52. ‘THOU ART THE MAN!’: Denouncing David for his abduction of 
Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 12:7.
53. ‘with a village headman’: Called Asibandhakaputta. Nāḷandā, his 
village, was to become the site of the great future international Buddhist 
university (housing some 10,000 students at the height of its popularity), 
that flourished from at least the second to the seventh century CE, then 
gradually contracting until ravaged by an Afghan army in 1197. Yet even 
in 1235, at the time of a second Muslim onslaught, two monasteries with 
some seventy monks survived.
54. ‘more fully to some than to others’: Sakkaccaṃ, in Pali, meaning more 
‘carefully’, and so more ‘thoroughly’, Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 
42:7.
55. ‘my bhikkhus and bhikkhunis’: My monks and nuns.

THE BROKEN GONG

56. ‘male and female lay-followers’: Literally ūpasakas and ūpasikās; 
‘wandering recluses’, literally samaṇas.
57. ‘there went out a sower to sow’: Mark 4:3-8. Cf. also Matthew 13:38 
(with its explication, 13:18-23) and Luke 8:58 (with its explication, 8:9-15).
58. ‘a notably clumsy and uncharacteristic gloss’: Mark 4:14-20. The 
allegorization is clumsy in its apparent identification of hearers with the 
seed sown rather than (as in the Buddha’s parable) with various types of 
soil and their potential crops.
59. ‘the Tathāgata has two ways of teaching’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 2:14.
60. ‘aware of the right time’: Majjhima Nikāya, Abhayarājakumāra Sutta (58:8).
61. ‘Thus, Bāhiya, you should train yourself’: Dhammapada Commentary ii, 
209-10, 216 and Udāna 1:10. Dārucīriya literally means ‘of the Bark Garment’.
62. ‘the leper Suppabuddha’: Udāna 5:3.
63. ‘a relay of seven coaches’: Majjhima Nikāya, Rathavinīta Sutta (24).
64. ‘that the essence of nibbāna is attachment!’: Literally ‘he would have 
described what is still accompanied by clinging as nibbāna through not 
clinging’, Majjhima Nikāya, Rathavinīta Sutta (24:12).
65. ‘this clinging vine ... known in English as the “killer” creeper’: See 
Kenneth Anderson, ‘The Evil One of Umbalmeru’, The Call of the Man-Eater 
(London: Allen & Unwin, 1961), pp. 58-59. 
66. ‘the least twinge of lust’: kāma, ‘sensual desire’, in its root sense, denotes 
‘sexual pleasure’.
67. ‘the “soft, tender, downy touch” of a female embrace’: The Buddha had 
specifically warned his monks against wandering nuns with hair coiled 
up into top-knots; even from contemplating how pleasant it would be to 
feel ‘a wandering woman’s soft, tender, downy arms’, Majjhima Nikāya, 
Cūḷadhammasamādāna Sutta (45:3). Cf. ‘The touch of the woman-treasure 
is like that of a tuft of kapok or wad of cotton-wool. When it is cool, her 
limbs are warm; when it is warm, her limbs are cool ...’ Majjhima Nikāya, 
Bālapaṇḍita Sutta (129:39).
68. ‘a tall Sāl tree’: Shorea robusta, yielding teak-like timber and dammar 
resin.
69. ‘the hamadryad’: In Greek and Roman mythology, a nymph who lives in 
a tree and dies when it dies.

NOTES

6. FIGURES IN THE LANDSCAPE
1. ‘an unrivalled picture of Hindu ... culture’: Just as Jesus’s parables 
present ‘a singularly complete and convincing picture ... of life in a small 
provincial town – probably a more complete picture of petit-bourgeois and 
peasant life than we possess for any other province of the Roman Empire 
except Egypt, where papyri come to our aid’, C. H. Dodd, The Parables of the 
Kingdom, ch. 1, p. 20. Cf. also Dodd, The Authority of the Bible (James Nisbet, 
1929), for a mosaic of daily life in first century Galilee pieced together from 
the parables (part II, ch. 6, pp. 144-148).
2. ‘suppose a baby was laid on its back’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:7.
3. ‘When Prince Abhaya was dandling a baby’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Abhayarājakumāra Sutta (58:10-11).
4. ‘he identifies with ... In fact, he is the nurse’: Cf. ‘it was not the mere 
Nurse in Romeo and Juliet ... but it was this great & mighty Being changing 
himself into the Nurse ...’, as Coleridge admiringly said of Shakespeare’s 
protean imagination, Lectures 1808-1819: On Literature, edited by R. A. Foakes 
(Princeton 1987), vol. 1, p. 225.
5. ‘Suppose someone were to chuck a stone ball ... to hurl a ball of string’: 
Majjhima Nikāya, Kāyagatāsati Sutta (119:45 and 49).
6. ‘“Vanish earth! Vanish earth!”’: Majjhima Nikāya , Kakacūpama Sutta 
(21:13).
7. ‘laid aside weapons ... abandoned sexual play’: Majjhima Nikāya, Kandaraka 
Sutta (51:16) and Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1:1.8-1.10).
8. ‘the Nepali Terai’: A small part of which is now Nepal’s Chitwan National 
Park with its elephants, wild buffalo, gaur (wild cattle), fish-eating 
crocodiles and one-horned rhinoceros. (‘Walk alone like a rhinoceros’, 
the Khaggavisana Sutta advises.) But no Royal Bengal Tigers it seems. Two 
and a half thousand years ago few tigers had yet crossed the Himalayas 
from Manchuria and Siberia to displace – and ultimately exterminate – the 
native Asiatic lion.
9. ‘it rapidly reswallowed towns and villages’: Cf. ‘It’s just as if someone 
wandering through the jungle came across an ancient road and following 
it should find a royal city, inhabited by men of former times, with its ponds 
and groves and walls ...’ Saṁyutta Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 12:65.

THE BROKEN GONG

10. ‘a haunt for robbers and runaway slaves’: seeVinaya-piṭaka : Mahāvagga 
1:47 [PTS: vol. 4, 76]. 
11. ‘a special force of uniformed police’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 42:13.
12. ‘elected (or possibly hereditary) headman’: See Asibandhakaputta, 
Headman of Nālandā (ch. 5, note 53).
13. ‘a bhikkhu’s “patched robe”’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 8:12 [PTS: vol. 
4, 287].
14. ‘a single herdsman drove all the village cattle’: Who knew each beast 
and was skilled at picking flies’ eggs from their hides or lighting smoky 
fires to fend off gnats, ‘expertly crossing at fords, stopping at wateringholes, choosing pasture, leaving milk in the cows’ udders and respecting 
the leader of the herd’, Majjhima Nikāya , Mahāgopālaka Sutta (33). Cf. 
Aṅguttara Nikāya 11:17 and Jātaka 413 [PTS: vol. 3, 401.]
15. ‘Magadha ... reputedly had 80,000 villages’: An infinite number, see 
Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 5:1 [PTS: vol. 4, 180].
16. ‘THE JUNGLE’: Sanskrit, jangal. Not every allusion is annotated, 
especially details derived from the Dhammapada.
17. ‘hermits ... their retreats’: Literally rishis (Sanskrit, rsi; Pali, isi), often 
with a reputation for magic powers.
18. ‘Every roaming deer ... even a peacock’: ‘I dwelt in such awe-inspiring 
abodes as orchard shrines, forest shrines and tree shrines, where every 
roaming deer would startle me ...’ Majjhima Nikāya , Bhayabherava Sutta 
(4:20).
19. ‘even chariots ... in the pursuit of boars’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 10:2 
[PTS vol. 4, 346].
20. ‘Angulimāla ... boasted about how he could outrace’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Angulimāla Sutta (86:5).
21. ‘whirling their flickering arms ...’: Jātakamāla xvi.
22. ‘Reeds grew along the streams’: kashta, a kind of bamboo.
23. ‘the young Devadatta, aim his bow’: The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha, 
trans. S. Beal (London, 1875), ch. xii, 1, pp. 72-73.
24. ‘following the path of the sun’: Dhammapada 91 and 175.

NOTES

25. ‘laboriously punted upstream’: ‘uddhaṃ-soto , “he who goes upstream”, 
against the current of passions and worldly life’, Dhammapada 218.
26. ‘a herdsman fording his cattle’: ‘He made the bulls, the fathers and 
leaders of the herd, cross over first, and they breasted the stream of the 
Ganges ...’ Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷagopālaka Sutta (34:4).
27. ‘monsoons could devastate a sleeping village’: Dhammapada 47 and 287.
28. ‘a square pond ... a dyke round a great reservoir’: Vinaya-piṭaka: 
Cullavagga 10.1 [PTS vol. 5, 253-256]. Cf. also Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:51.
29. ‘a heated dispute between the Sakyans and the Koliyans’: Jātaka 536 
[PTS vol. 5, 412-414].
30. ‘stooping to slice his sickle through grass’: Aṅguttara Nikāya  5:7. 
Thatching-grass is to be distinguished from razor-sharp kusa-grass which, 
‘wrongly grasped, will cut one’s hand’ (Dhammapada  311), though it too 
could be woven into fabric (Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta [12:45] and 
Kandaraka Sutta [51:8]).
31. ‘a whole family in white surrounding the pyre’: Jātaka 354 [PTS vol. 3, 
163].
32. ‘squat at the pits ... or even tumble into the cess’: Cf. the anecdote in 
Majjhima Nikāya, Laṭukikopama Sutta (66:6) with the image of the damned in 
Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:38) and the parable in Dīgha Nikāya, 
Pāyāsi Sutta (23:9).
33. ‘clumps of sugarcane’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 10:1 [PTS vol. 5, 256]; 
Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:51.
34. ‘their backs bent, their hair dishevelled ...’: The Romantic Legend of Sakya 
Buddha, ch. xii, 2, pp. 73-74.
35. ‘the father hoisting the plough’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 4:19 
(Māra in masquerade).
36. ‘drove as far as the road was passable ...’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dhammacetiya 
Sutta (89:6) and Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:1.3, 2.14, etc).
37. ‘commandeer all suitable village housing’: ‘And the inhabitants who 
had to evacuate ... watch from afar wondering, “When are they going to 
go?”’ Khuddaka-Pātha, Commentary 232-235.
38. ‘still dressed as robbers after spying ...’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthavagga] 
3:11 and Udāna 6:2.

THE BROKEN GONG

39. ‘wandering lepers, like Suppabuddha’: Udāna 5:3.
40. ‘the odd Brahman with a carrying-pole’: Dīgha Nikāya, Ambaṭṭha Sutta 
(3:2.3).
41. ‘ragged beggars’: The Buddha specifically prohibited his monks from 
begging: Vinaya-piṭaka: Suttavibhanga, Sanghādisesa 6 [PTS vol. 1, 145-148].
42. ‘abuse or censure their opponents’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:65.
43. ‘cloaks of owl-feathers or “owls’ wings”’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda 
Sutta (12:45) and Kandaraka Sutta (51:8).
44. ‘Some imitated dogs’: Majjhima Nikāya, Kukkuravatika Sutta (57, passim) 
and Dīgha Nikāya, Pāṭika Sutta (24:1.7-1.10).
45. ‘oxen tethered to the wheels’: Jātaka 1 [PTS vol. 1, 98 ff.]. Cf. Dīgha 
Nikāya, Pāyāsi Sutta (23:23).
46. ‘cottages, were thatched’: Like the house of Ghaṭīkāra, the potter 
(Majjhima Nikāya, Ghaṭīkāra Sutta [81:21]). For outside ovens, see Majjhima 
Nikāya, Sela Sutta (92:4).
47. ‘sparks from a ... careless lamp’: Milindapañha II, ‘Distinguishing Marks’ 
6 [PTS 47].
48. ‘a barn ... once sheltered the Buddha during a thunderstorm’: Dīgha 
Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:4.30) ff.
49. ‘cattle in staked-out pens’: Sutta Nipāta 36.
50. ‘screened by hibiscus’: also mentioned ‘with its red glow’ at Majjhima 
Nikāya, Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:23).
51. ‘especially prized for religious offerings’: That is, ceremonial food for 
the devas. See Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka Sutta (35:29).
52. ‘horse-traders setting up their “market rings”’: Vinaya-piṭaka: 
Suttavibhanga, Pārājika 1:2 [PTS vol. 1, 6].
53. ‘Royal Annual Ploughing Festival’: Sutta Nipāta 12-14. See Jātaka Nidāna 
for a city event with the king personally driving a gilded plough; his 
ministers, silver ploughs.
54. ‘setting off ... to bathe’: Majjhima Nikāya, Ghaṭīkāra Sutta (81:7).
55. ‘throwing mud-pies’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 23:2.

NOTES

56. ‘catching crabs in the village pond’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 
4:24; Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasaccaka Sutta (35:27).
57. ‘miniature ploughs ... model chariots’: Dīgha Nikāya , Brahmajāla Sutta 
(1:1.14).
58. ‘ubiquitous hawking and spitting’: Expressly discouraged when the 
Buddha was teaching, Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:6).
59. ‘shouts of “Crazy fool! Crazy fool!”’: Dhammapada Commentary ii, 260270.
60. ‘And don’t forget ... your kids!’: Jātaka 536 [PTS vol. 5, 413].
61. ‘menial black fellows’: (Dravidians, that is) in a Brahman’s scornful 
phrase addressing the Buddha, Dīgha Nikāya , Ambaṭṭha Sutta (3:1.10 and 
2.5). But the Buddha disdained such caste attitudes. ‘The Tathāgatha 
teaches Dhamma to the multitude, even when they are only fowlers ...’, 
Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:120-121.
The Buddha not only abolished caste division but denied any racial 
differentiation between Aryans and non-Aryans and Aborigines. The family 
of man, he argued, is physically homogeneous, unlike the diversification 
of all other species: grass, trees, moths, butterflies, quadrupeds, snakes, 
fish, birds, etc. ‘With men no differences of birth make a distinctive mark’, 
Majjhima Nikāya, Vāseṭṭha Sutta (98:9, verse 14).
62. ‘liquor, wine or fermented brew’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta 
(12:45) and Kandaraka Sutta (51:8). For an image of brewers dragging a 
strainer through a water-tank, see Majjhima Nikāya, Upāli Sutta (56:7).
63. ‘A village-treasurer’s daughter ... a common labourer’: Aṅguttara 
Commentary 249 ff.
64. ‘favouring the lighter-skinned offspring’: Thus the emphasis on the 
Buddha’s ‘golden hue’.
65. ‘the sacrificial priesthood of brāhmaṇas’: Guardians of the religious 
cult brought into India c. 1600 BCE, they not only conducted sacrifices but 
were learned in the three Vedas as well as initiatory mantras. For their 
claim to caste superiority, see Dīgha Nikāya, Ambaṭṭha Sutta (3:1.14) and the 
Buddha’s counter-claim on behalf of the Khattiyas (3:1.24-1.28). See also 
Dīgha Nikāya, Aggañña Sutta (27:3).
66. ‘those “of low birth” devoted to “low trades”’: For the Buddha’s 
impassioned plea that everyone should have equal access to worship, be

THE BROKEN GONG

they of an outcast clan, or a trapper clan, or a rush-workers’ clan, or a 
cartwrights’ clan, or a scavengers’ clan ...’, see Majjhima Nikāya , Esukāri 
Sutta (96:16) and Assalāyana Sutta (93:11). Cf. Kaṇṇakatthala Sutta (90:12).
67. ‘The number of guilds’: SeeVinaya-piṭaka : Cullavagga 5:5 and 5:26 [PTS 
vol. 5, 109 and 132] and Suttavibhanga, Nissaggiya 30:1 and Bhikkhuni 
Pācittiya 9:1 [PTS vol. 2, 265 and 30]. In Jātaka 546 [PTS vol. 5, 427], only 
four guilds are named. See Mrs. Rhys Davids, the Economic Journal (1901) 
and Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1901). See also T. W. Rhys Davids, 
Buddhist India (London, 1903), ch. 6, pp. 88-97.
68. ‘King Ajātasattu of Magadha ... remarking’: Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala 
Sutta (2:14). ‘Secretaries’ (trusted servants) literally are ‘slaves’ sons’.
69. ‘fifteen or so miles a day’: Less than two yojanas, that is; one yojana 
being the distance a pair of buffaloes, yoked to a cart, can pull without 
unyoking – say, eight to ten miles. Though the Buddha, in his aristocratic 
way, considered trade a minor undertaking ‘involving a small amount of 
activity’, Majjhima Nikāya, Subha Sutta (99:6).
70. ‘a flat rooftop’: Called the upari-pāsāda-tala. For kite-flying, visit Jaipur 
in Rajasthan to this day.
71. ‘with gable-ends, plastered inside and out’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:35 and 
Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:9).
72. ‘dyers (with their colouring vats)’: Such as ‘Master Redhand’, Majjhima 
Nikāya, Upāli Sutta (56:27).
73. ‘fletchers ... silversmiths ... blacksmiths ... carpenters’: Dhammapada 33, 
154, 156, 239, and 308.
74. ‘holding up a pair of scales ... These are my sons’: Dhammapada 268 and 62.
75. ‘the Inda-khīla, or “locking-post”’: Hammered eight-to-ten feet into 
the ground, at the centre of the city-gateway’s threshold, to hold fast 
the double gates; home of the city’s guardian-spirit. Since it was buried 
to half its height in the earth, ‘Firm as an Inda-post’ became a proverbial 
saying. See Dhammapada 95; and Dīgha Nikāya , Pāsādika Sutta (29:26). For 
‘bejewelled’, see Mahāvastu iii, 63-64.
76. ‘resplendent, symmetrical ... with all manner of holy places’: 
Milindapañha V, ‘A Question Solved by Inference’ [PTS 330].
77. ‘perfumed dandies ... flourishing staves’: Dīgha Nikāya, Ambaṭṭha Sutta 
(3:2.9-2.10).

NOTES

78. ‘reduced ... to just ten sounds’: ‘Ānanda, the royal city of Kusāvatī 
was never silent by day and night ...’ Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta 
(16:5.18).
79. ‘cotton dhotis ... white muslin’: Wholesale cotton and muslin 
manufacture was centred in Benares (Vārānāsi). Brahman cups and bowls 
were for their own exclusive use.
80. ‘some noisy homecoming party’: Dhammapada 219.
81. ‘a household slave escorting a ... merchant’: Such slaves attended to 
their master’s physical needs, such as washing his feet.
82. ‘gamblers ... tossing dice’: Jātaka 545 [PTS vol. 6, 281]. Cf. also 62 [vol. 1, 
290] and 327 [vol. 3, 91]. For various forms of cheating, see Dīgha Nikāya, 
Pāyāsi Sutta (23:27) and Jātaka 91 [vol. 1, 380].
83. ‘a “lucky” or “unlucky” throw’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:65. See ch. 7, notes 
37 and 38.
84. ‘Sirimā ... of Rājagaha, or Ambapalī of Vesālī’: Dhammapada Commentary 
iii, 104-109 and Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.14-2.19).
85. ‘relays of three four-hour shifts’: Wooden blocks were struck for the 
beginning of the First Watch, that lasted from 6.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m.; and 
again to mark the Middle Watch from 10.00 p.m. to 2.00 a.m.; and again to 
mark the Final Watch from 2.00 a.m. to 6.00 a.m.
86. ‘the houses in this city ... nothing but holes’: Aṅguttara Commentary 220224.
87. ‘the South Gate’: Also known as the ‘Cemetery Gate’ (sīvathīka or āmakasusāna), Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:23); Jātaka 51, 398 and 537 [PTS 
vol. 1, 264, vol. 3, 330 and vol. 5, 458].
88. ‘first the poor died ...’: At Vesālī, Khuddakapāṭha Commentary 160-165.
89. ‘to the loud beating of a single drum’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 10:2 
[PTS vol. 4, 344].
90. ‘beheaded ... impaled ... hacked’: For ‘lashing’, see Aṅguttara Commentary 
220-224; for beheading, Dīgha Nikāya, Pāyāsi Sutta (23:7); for impaling, Jātaka 444 
[PTS vol. 4, 29] and 538 [vol. 6, 10]; for quartering, Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 10:2 
[PTS vol. 4, 344-345].
91. ‘the “burning-ground”’: Jātaka 166 [PTS vol. 2, 54-56].

THE BROKEN GONG

92. ‘a memorial mound ... or stūpa’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Suttavibhanga, Bhikkhuni 
Pācittiya 52:1 [PTS vol. 3, 308].
93. ‘King Pasenadi died, homeless as King Lear’: From exposure, in the open 
rest-house. 
The most loyal of the Buddha’s royal supporters both came to a bad 
end; both usurped by their own sons. King Pasenadi (the Buddha’s exact 
contemporary) was abandoned in Sakyan territory, where he was paying 
his last respects to the Buddha. King Seniya Bimbisāra, Pasenadi’s brotherin-law, after voluntarily abdicating (Vinaya-piṭaka : Cullavagga 7:3 [PTS 
vol. 5, 191]), was imprisoned and starved to death at Rājagaha by his son, 
Ajātasattu Vedehiputta (reigned c. 491-459 BCE).
After these Machiavellian coups, the two cousins went to war: Pasenadi’s 
son, Viḍūḍabha, overrunning the Sakyās and Koliyās; Ajātasattu conquering 
Vesālī, capital of the Vajjian confederacy. Whereupon he transferred his 
capital from Rājagaha to Pāṭaliputta (the modern Patna).
94. ‘a vast, walled compound’: A pattern maintained by Moghul courts, as 
can still be seen in Akbar’s deserted city of Fatehpur Sikri.
95. ‘Have you calculators enough ...?’: Bhikkhuni Khemā, Saṁyutta Nikāya 
IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 44:1.
96. ‘the Hall of Justice’: ‘Every day ministers of justice took their seats in 
the place of litigation ...’ Jātaka 151 [PTS vol. 2, 1-5].
97. ‘scattered pavilions such as Suddhodana ... had built’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 
3:38 and Mahāvastu ii, 115-117 and 144.
98. ‘the house-priest of the King’: Purohitaṃ, the King’s head-priest, a 
Brahman combining the roles of domestic chaplain and Prime Minister. 
See Dīgha Nikāya, Kūṭadanta Sutta (5:10) and Aṅguttara Commentary, 220 ff.
99. ‘a warrior dazzling in his armour’: Dhammapada 387.
100. ‘from the magnificent bronze the gleam went/ dazzling’: Homer, Iliad 
II, 457-458, trans. Richmond Lattimore (University of Chicago Press, 1951).
101. ‘huge army elephants (inured to arrows)’: Dhammapada 320.
102. ‘Kesi, the horse-trainer’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:111.
103. ‘Channa ... who tended Kanthaka’: On whose back Prince Siddhattha 
fled wife and child. Channa, the groom, returned with news of the Prince‘s 
renunciation to King Suddhodana; the white charger died on the spot of a 
broken heart: Jātaka Nidāna 65.

NOTES

104. ‘the royal painted chariot’: Dhammapada 151 and 171. The four 
branches of the army, sometimes called the ‘fourfold army’, consisted of 
elephants, cavalry, chariots and infantry. See Dīgha Nikāya, Kūṭadanta Sutta 
(5:13) and Mahāsudassana Sutta (17:1.8).
105. ‘storehouses and granaries’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 10:2 [PTS vol. 
4, 342].
106. ‘hunchbacks, dwarves ... dancing-girls in scarlet cloaks’: Dīgha Nikāya, 
Pāyāsi Sutta (23:15) and Mahāvastu ii, 140.
107. ‘what can be the point of renunciation ...’: Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala 
Sutta (2:14).
108. ‘King Bimbisāra ... in his state coach’: Mahāvastu iii, 437-440. Cf. the 
Brahmans and householders calling to King Mahāsudassana, as he set out 
for the park with his fourfold army: ‘Pass slowly, Sire, that we may see you 
as long as possible!’ (Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāsudassana Sutta [17:1.21]).
109. ‘he praised the Vajjian republican system ...’: Dīgha Nikāya , 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:1.4-1.6) and Aṅguttara Nikāya 7:20.
110. ‘he rejected Devadatta’s bid’: To usurp the Sangha when he was 
seventy-two, in the thirty-seventh year after his Enlightenment.
111. ‘What I have proclaimed as the Dhamma and the Vinaya’: Dīgha Nikāya, 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:6.1).
112. ‘the Buddhist Sangha ... no official head’: Majjhima Nikāya , Gopaka 
Moggallāna Sutta (108, especially paras. 7 to 9).
113. ‘the 220-man Sangha of the Licchavi Federation’: Drawn from the 
7707-strong warrior caste. Their elected head governed for a seven-month 
term.
114. ‘news of the Buddha’s imminent demise’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (16:5.20).
115. ‘long lines of geese and quail’: As can still be seen in the old palace at 
Kandy in Sri Lanka.
116. ‘strips of ... cloth and swags of flowers’: Mahāvastu ii, 115-117.
117. ‘the preparation of a smooth ground’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 11:1 
[PTS vol. 5, 291].

THE BROKEN GONG

118. ‘“Wreath-work”, “Creeper-work” ...’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Suttavibhanga, 
Bhikkhuni Pācittiya 19 [PTS vol. 2, 47] and Cullavagga 5:14 [PTS vol. 5, 121].
119 ‘“cittāgāra”, or “picture-gallery”’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 6:3 [PTS vol. 
5:151-2] and Bhikkhuni Pācittiya 41:1-2 [PTS vol. 3, 298].
120. ‘attended to pleasantly by his four wives’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:34.
121. ‘a canopied couch, draped by white, fleecy rugs’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:41).
122. ‘gilded and upholstered couches’: Mahāvastu ii, 115-117.
123. ‘the upper apartments of the Kokanada Palace’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Bodhirājakumāra Sutta (85:3 to 9).
124. ‘doubtless the worthy Gotama can conjure’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:181-184.
125. ‘filled with so many multicoloured robes’: Sāriputta in the Gosinga 
Sāla Forest, Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāgosinga Sutta (32:9).
126. ‘Benares cotton ... radiant shades of blue’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:23).
127. ‘sliced off his top-knot with his sword’: Jātaka Nidāna 64.
128. ‘displayed his father’s turban and sword’: Which King Pasenadi had 
respectfully consigned to a trusted councillor on the Buddha’s porch, 
before knocking and entering. The minister returned post-haste to 
Sāvatthī with his trophies, leaving the aged King with just one horse and a 
serving-maid: Majjhima Nikāya, Dhammacetiya Sutta (89:8).
129. ‘special “umbrella cases”’: Majjhima Nikāya, Bāhitika Sutta (88:18).
130. ‘sandalled householders ... might hold a parasol’: Such as Potaliya in 
Majjhima Nikāya, Potaliya Sutta (54:3).
131. ‘hair sleek with oil ...’: Theragāthā 949 ff.
132. ‘painted his eyes with collyrium’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  II [Nidānavagga] 
21:8.
133. ‘tanks; or ... sweatbaths’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 5:14, 16 and 17; and 
[PTS vol. 5, 119-123]. See T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, p. 74.
134. ‘first the cleansing with bamboo scrapers …’: Dīgha Nikāya, Pāyāsi Sutta 
(23:9).

NOTES

135. ‘rice from which the black grain had been sifted’: Mahāvastu ii, 115117. Cf. King Kikī of Kāsi, Majjhima Nikāya, Ghaṭīkāra Sutta (81:16).
136. ‘dancing, sing-songs, drum sessions’: Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1: 
1.13) ff, repeated verbatim in Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:43-62).
137. ‘large-scale fresco decorations’: The debated term, a sobhanagarakam, literally means ‘shows from Sobha’, the city of gandhabbas, 
or heavenly musicians. So perhaps the modern equivalent should rather 
be ‘ballets’ or ‘pantomimes’. Just as plausibly, however, it has been taken 
to refer to frescoed galleries (cittāgāra ), where human figures in motion 
predominated. See note 119.
138. ‘scratched a memo of gifts on a palm-leaf’: Aṅguttara Commentary,  
193 ff. Though it may well be that there was no writing at all yet in the 
Buddha’s lifetime and the few allusions to it in the Pali Canon date from 
the third century BCE, or later. See Harry Falk, Schrift im alten Indien (India: 
Gunter Narr Verlag, 1993).
139. ‘the youth, who delivered it’: Aṅguttara Commentary 251.
140. ‘listening, pondering, memorizing’: See Saṁyutta Nikāya  II 
[Nidānavagga] 20:7.
141. ‘the art of writing ... actively encouraged’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Suttavibhanga, 
Bhikkhuni Pācittiya 49:2 [PTS vol. 3, 304].
142. ‘the profession of scrivener’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 1:49 [PTS vol. 4, 
77] and Suttavibhanga, Bhikkhuni Pācittiya 45:1 [PTS vol. 3, 128].
143. ‘written up in the King’s porch’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 1:43 [PTS 
vol. 4, 75].
144. ‘a short, uncomplicated text’: Cf. T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, chs. 
7 and 8.
145. ‘De la Grammatologie’: (1967), trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak 
(Baltimore, 1976), though the opposition in Phaedrus is less between 
speaking and writing (broadly viewed) than between speech-writing (or 
rhetoric) and a wholly oral dialectic.
146. ‘multitudinous chatter ... an oral set-piece’: For the standardization 
of ‘vulgar talk’, see Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1:1.17); Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 
(9:3); Udumbarikasīhanāda Sutta (25:2); Majjhima Nikāya , Dīghanakha Sutta 
(76:4); and Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta (77:4).

THE BROKEN GONG

147. ‘Jānussoni’s all-white chariot’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga], 45:4. 
See also ch. 1, p. 13.
148. ‘Some were in blue, with blue make-up on ...’: Dīgha Nikāya , 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.15-2.17).
149. ‘Some notion of the Thirty-Three Gods!’: Whose chief is Sakka. Like us, 
they live in the abodes of sense-desire (Kāma-loka), which are part of the 
ever-shifting cycle of rebirth.
150. ‘my councillors interrupt me’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dhammacetiya Sutta 
(89:13).
151. ‘Mind games ... were popular’: Mind-searching (manesika ), as a 
guessing-game, not to be confused with telepathy (reading mental states). 
See Dīgha Nikāya, Kevaddha Sutta (11:6).
152. ‘108 Brahmans ... invited by King Suddhodana’: Jātaka Nidāna  
(introduction to the Commentary on the Jātakas).
153. ‘the ascetic Gotama’: Dīgha Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1:1.21-1.27).
154. ‘the Himalaya was his pillow’: The Buddha dreamt this gargantuan 
dream while still a Bodhisattva, Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:196.
155. ‘a lotus-pond with cool, transparent water’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:42).
156. ‘the Venerable Sāriputta ... after nightfall’: Welcoming five elders 
(including his younger brother, Revata), Majjhima Nikāya , Mahāgosiṅga 
Sutta (32:4-8).
157. ‘King Ajātasattu ... on his palace rooftop’: On an October or November 
night at the end of the four-month rainy season. Literally it was ‘the fullmoon of the fourth month, called Komudi’ (after the white water-lily, 
kumuda, which blooms then): Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:1).
158. ‘King Pasenadi ... observing root-hollows’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Dhammacetiya Sutta (89:4).
159. ‘Delightful, Ānanda, is Rājagaha ...’: Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (16:3.41-3.43).
160. ‘ruined cities ... buried deep in the jungle’: To be rediscovered 
by chance, just as the Buddha’s Noble Eightfold Path was merely the 
retrieval of Dhamma taught by Buddhas long, long ago: Saṁyutta Nikāya II 
[Nidānavagga] 12:65. See note 9.

NOTES

161. ‘The Blessed One ... spotted a large log of wood’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:241. Cf. the pilot’s trained eye in Mark Twain’s Life on 
the Mississippi (1883).
162. ‘There are no fixtures ... We live amid surfaces’: Emerson, ‘Circles’ and 
‘Experience’ (Essays, First Series, 1841, and Second Series, 1844).
163. ‘from the charcoal furnace (of hell) ...’: Majjhima Nikāya 12, 
Mahāsīhanāda Sutta, paras. 37-42. Nibbāna derives from ni(r)-va, ‘notto-blow’: viz. to cease blowing the bellows on a smith’s fire; and so the 
cooling, and ultimately extinction, of fire. Cf. the image of the goldsmith 
preparing a furnace for his crucible and ‘blowing on it from time to time’, 
Majjhima Nikāya, Dhātuvibhanga Sutta (140:20).
164. ‘And the pool was filled with water ...’: T. S. Eliot, ‘Burnt Norton’ (1941), 
lines 35-37.
7. VERNACULAR HUMOUR
1. ‘I’m Pokkharasāti’s pupil’: Majjhima Nikāya, Vāseṭṭha Sutta (98:7).
2. ‘Of him who without vana leans/ to vana’: Dhammapada 344. Pali poetics 
makes no use of rhyme, only of metrical pulses, alliteration and recurrent 
case endings. I have resolved this issue by translating throughout into 
unrhymed, four-line octosyllabics.
3. ‘conflating “wood” with “would”’: A pun proposed by the Venerable 
Ñāṇamoli Thera.
4. ‘Cut down the “would” ... As long as “would” ...’: Dhammapada 283-284.
5. ‘As trees, though felled ...’: Dhammapada 338.
6. ‘whether in town ... Even forests ...’: Dhammapada 98-99.
7. ‘Taming himself in solitude’: Dhammapada 305.
8. ‘The tusked are tame ...’: Dhammapada 321.
9. ‘just as all features of the feet ...’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 48:54.
10. ‘“Dīpa” ... denoting “island” as well as “lamp”’: From Sanskrit dvīpa 
(island) and dīpa (lamp).
11. ‘By energetic mindfulness ...’: Dhammapada 25.

THE BROKEN GONG

12. ‘Make an island of yourself!’: Dhammapada 236 and 238. Cf. also: ‘Monks, 
be islands unto yourselves, be your own refuge, having no other. Let the 
Dhamma be a lamp and a refuge to you, having no other ...’ Saṁyutta Nikāya 
III [Khandhavagga] 22:43.
13. ‘Therefore, Ānanda, you should live as islands’: Dīgha Nikāya , 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.26).
14. ‘All those who are not free of stains ... But he who vomits forth his 
taints’: Dhammapada 9-10. Cf. also Dhammapada 307.
15. ‘kāsāva , a yellow stain or dye’: Whose source, however, cannot be 
manioc, or cassava, which is of post-Columbian, American origin.
16. ‘Neither by mona a muni ...’: Dhammapada 268-269. Cf. Dhammapada 49. 
See also ch. 1, p. 19.
17. ‘When muffled as a broken gong’: Dhammapada 134. When striking a 
gong, it is not just a single note that sounds, but all the various tones and 
overtones of the harmonic series.
18. ‘“Obstructing evil” (brāhmaṇo)’: Dhammapada 388. Not a ‘brahman’, in 
short, but a ‘bar-man’! For brāhmaṇo, cf. also Dhammapada 142 and 383-423 
(the Brahmaṇavagga); for samaṇo, cf. 264-265; for pabbajito, 302.
19. ‘“When I use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said’: Lewis Carroll, Through the 
Looking-Glass (1871), ch. 6. See ch. 1, p. 19.
20. ‘how is a bhikkhu a Samaṇa?’: Majjhima Nikāya , Mahā-Assapura Sutta 
(39:23). Sāmañña, the religious life, stems from the Pali word for ‘serene’ 
or ‘quiet’.
21. ‘There is birth; there is decay ...’: Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāpadāna Sutta 
(14:2.18). ‘All men are “born” to be “borne” to a common “bourn”’, might 
be an English equivalent: birth being the precondition of dying, and death 
a prelude for rebirth. Cf. ‘With birth there is ageing and dying ...’, Saṁyutta 
Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 12:65.
22. ‘going upstream (uddhaṃ-soto)’: Dhammapada 218.
23. ‘And why ... do you say rūpa [body]?’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
22:79.
24. ‘Just why, Sir, are we called a satto?’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 
23:2.

NOTES

25. ‘In a pun the component parts ...’: Richard Ellmann, ‘The Politics of 
Joyce’, The New York Review, 9 June 1977.
26. ‘“Loka”, they all keep repeating’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 
35:84. A play on ‘location’ and ‘dislocated’, or ‘place’ and ‘displaced’; also 
picks up aspects of the pun. In Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:82, 
the pun is less convincingly given as: ‘It is being worn away [lujjati], that is 
why it’s called loka.’
27. ‘the bandit Angulimāla’: A bloodthirsty highwayman notorious for 
murdering wayfarers, even massacring parties up to forty strong, whose 
fingers (aṇguli) he cut off and strung into a garland (māla): Majjhima Nikāya, 
Angulimāla Sutta (86, especially 2-6).
28. ‘like the young Brahman ... impromptu verse’: This celebrated episode 
probably derives from an earlier ballad on the conversion of the massmurderer, of which Majjhima Nikāya , Angulimāla Sutta (86) preserves 
twenty-one stanzas.
29. ‘What’s a mirror for ... Rāhula’: Majjhima Nikāya, Ambalaṭṭhikā Rāhulovāda 
Sutta (61:8). The pun in Pali is on the gerundive paccavekkhanattho (looking 
in order to discover blemishes in the face) and the past participle 
paccavekkhitvā (having contemplated or considered). See also ch. 2, p. 43.
30. ‘those madcap Licchavi youths’: Their contemptuous nickname 
for Ambapālī conflates amba (mango) and ambakā (woman) into the 
portmanteau ‘mango-woman’. Her real name means ‘mango-guardian’: 
Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.16).
31. ‘What ... is the reason for the Exalted One’s smiling?’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Ghaṭīkāra Sutta (81:2) and Makhādeva Sutta (83:2). The Buddha’s replies are, 
in effect, displaced Jātaka tales with all their familiar formulas preserved.
32. ‘But here I see monks smiling ...’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dhammacetiya Sutta 
(89:12).
33. ‘Suppose ... someone had been wounded by an arrow ...’: Majjhima 
Nikāya, Cūḷamālunkya Sutta (63:5). See ch. 2, p. 28.
34. ‘Swiftian “saeva indignatio ”’: ‘ubi saeva indignatio ulterius cor lacerare 
requit’, Swift’s own epitaph for himself, derived from Juvenal, Satires i, 79.
35. ‘Tell them you are a samaṇa ... who has crossed over’: Mahāvastu iii, 421424.

THE BROKEN GONG

36. ‘the taste of soup’: Dhammapada 64-65. For ‘wisdom’, literally read 
‘Dhamma’.
37. ‘If there’s no world beyond ...’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:65.
38. ‘But ... should another world be confirmed’: See also Majjhima Nikāya, 
Apaṇṇaka Sutta (60:12). This is reminiscent of Pascal’s wager: that it is 
prudent to bet on the Christian religion just in case it might be true. The 
Buddha’s line, though, smacks more of the turf accountant; Pascal’s, of an 
astute insurance salesman.
39. ‘However well it be laid by ...’: Khuddaka-Pātha [PTS XXXII, 8, verses 3-5].
40. ‘Imagine ... a broody hen refusing to sit on her eggs’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III 
[Khandhavagga] 22:101. Āsava, here translated as ‘defilements’, are literally 
‘eruptions’, deeply implanted blemishes in our human nature.
41. ‘Brahman, consider a hen with a clutch of ... eggs’: Vinaya-piṭaka, 
Suttavibhaṇga, Pārājika 1:4 [PTS vol. 1, 2]. See also Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:11. A 
clutch of sound eggs, properly incubated, elsewhere becomes a metaphor 
for any monk’s ‘hatching’ into enlightenment, Majjhima Nikāya, Cetokhila 
Sutta (16:27) and Sekha Sutta (53:19-22).
42. ‘And the devas are grumbling, Ānanda’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (16:5.4-5.5). For ‘leagues’, the Pali text reads ‘yojanas’ ; to ‘around this 
bend of the road leading to Kusinārā’, it adds ‘at the sāl-grove of the Malla 
princes’; ‘towards dawn’ translates as ‘in the last watch’.
43. ‘stripping “this great Earth” of earth’: See ch. 6, p. 135.
44. ‘in a spiritual context ... of maintaining loving-kindness’: Implying here 
not only mettā (‘good-will’, ‘benevolence’, ‘affectionate kindness’), but also 
the far more testing virtue of upekkha or ‘equanimity’, ‘forgiving the faults 
of all without resentment’.
45. ‘their speech may ... be untimely, or false ...’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Kakacūpama Sutta (21:11-21).
46. ‘four venomous snakes, a psychotic stalker’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  IV 
[Salāyatanavagga] 35:238. The ‘terrorists’ are literally ‘village bandits’. The 
whole paranoid career is subsequently allegorized.
47. ‘a bowl, brimming with oil’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 47:20.
48. ‘a huge mountain ... advancing and crushing’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  I 
[Sagāthavagga] 3:25.

NOTES

49. ‘Mother and father having slain’: Dhammapada 294-295. The 
Commentary explicates the two verses as follows: for ‘mother’, read 
‘craving’; for ‘father’, ‘self-conceit’; for the ‘two warrior kings’, ‘conflicting 
beliefs in eternity and annihilation’; for ‘a realm’, the ‘six sense-bases’ 
(eye, ear, etc.) and ‘six sense-objects’ (sight, sound, etc.); for ‘Brahmana’, 
an ‘Arahant’; for ‘a fearsome tiger’, ‘doubt’ or ‘uncertainty’. Of the five 
‘hindrances’ (nīvaranas), the fifth is like a tiger-infested journey (veyaggha 
[tiger] + pañcamaṃ [fifth]).
50. ‘Joyful to serve one’s mother here’: Dhammapada 332.
51. ‘Poṭṭhapāda, some ascetics and Brahmans’: Dīgha Nikāya , Poṭṭhapāda 
Sutta (9:34-36). Repeated in a debate on the ‘self’ as soul with the wanderer 
Udāyin, Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasakuludāyi Sutta (79:10). Cf. also Dīgha Nikāya, 
Tevijja Sutta (13:19).
52. ‘So, it seems form is not self ...’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāpuṇṇama (or ‘Full 
Moon’) Sutta (109:14). This discourse, then, was delivered on an Uposatha 
day when many lay people, as well as bhikkhus, still gather for a night-long 
session of meditation and listening to Dhamma.
53. ‘“intention” ... the very essence of kamma’: Also called sañcetanā. See 
Aṅguttara Nikāya 6:63: ‘Centanā’haṃ bhikkhave kammaṃ vadāmi.’
54. ‘the monk’s confused and paradoxical formulation’: The answer to his 
question, repressed here, remains crucial: that the very idea of ‘self’ – of 
an ‘I’ and ‘mine’ – is itself the cause and object of kamma. Where there is no 
concept of ‘self’, there can be no bad (akusala) deeds (kamma).
55. ‘too much bustle and chat’: See ch. 2, p. 77.
56. ‘stabbing with verbal daggers’: Majjhima Nikāya, Kosambiya Sutta (48:2) 
and Upakkilesa Sutta (128:2-5).
57. ‘muddle-headedness ... lucid rigour’: See ch. 2.
58. ‘I don’t even know the wanderer by sight’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahākammavibhanga Sutta (136:4-6). The Venerable Udāyin’s too-eager 
intervention (‘Whatever is felt is suffering’), though inapposite here, is a 
direct quotation from the Buddha. Making it, therefore, peculiarly galling. 
See also ch. 2, p. 32.
59. ‘If river water could really wash away sin’: Therīgāthā 240-244. ‘Sin and 
suffering’ here translates as ‘evil kamma’.

THE BROKEN GONG

60. ‘thrusting a joint of meat on a penniless man’: Majjhima Nikāya, Esukārī 
Sutta (96:4 and 11).
61. ‘Imagine a file of blind men’: Majjhima Nikāya , Subha Sutta (99:9); 
repeated, word for word, in the Cankī Sutta ( Majjhima Nikāya [95:13]) to a 
sixteen-year-old Brahman student (Kāpaṭhika), who had contested the 
Buddha’s authority by upholding the unique status of the Vedas – this 
time without triggering a backlash; again, without aggravation, to the 
young Brahman Vāseṭṭha (Dīgha Nikāya, Tevijja Sutta [13:15]). Cf. his teasing 
humiliation of the stuck-up Brahman lad Ambaṭṭha for being descended 
from a ‘black’ slave-girl, Dīgha Nikāya, Ambaṭṭha Sutta (3:1.16-1.17).
62. ‘the blind leading the blind’: Jesus, in similar vein, on the scribes and 
Pharisees: ‘Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the 
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.’ Matthew xv, 14. Which 
directly inspired Breughel’s painting.
63. ‘Unless Sunakkhatta recants his slander’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda 
Sutta (12:21, 28, 31, 34 and 43): the slander being that the Buddha was 
merely a rational and empirical thinker ‘teaching a Dhamma hammered 
out by human thought, following his own line of enquiry as it occurred to 
him’, Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:12). Cf. also Ānanda to the 
wanderer Sandaka, Majjhima Nikāya, Sandaka Sutta (76:27).
64. ‘Devadatta is a nefarious nihilist’: Majjhima Nikāya, Abhayarājakumāra 
Sutta (58:3); ‘all eternity’ literally reads as ‘an aeon’.
65. ‘Devadatta ... attempting to murder’: Commentary on Dhammapada 17.
66. ‘Devadatta’s father ... drunkenly obstructing’: (known as Suppabuddha, 
the Sakyan) Commentary on Dhammapada 128.
67. ‘Nandaka, the ogre’: Visuddhimagga 380.
68. ‘Ciñca, a Brahman woman’: Commentary on Dhammapada 176.
69. ‘Nanda, the Brahman youth’: Commentary on Dhammapada 69.
70. ‘a gut-wrenching crisis’: Attracting a whole cluster of images: roaring 
ears (as of a smith’s bellows), splitting headaches (as of a shattered skull or 
of a garrotting), severe cramps (as if butchered alive) and a fevered flush 
(as if roasting over a pit). This sequence was commonly associated with the 
throes of death. Cf. the Brahman Dhānañjāni on his deathbed (Majjhima 
Nikāya, Dhānañjāni Sutta [97:29]) and Anāthapiṇḍika on his (Majjhima 
Nikāya, Anāthapiṇḍikovāda Sutta [143:4]).

NOTES

71. ‘suppose I take less and less food’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsaccaka Sutta 
(36:28), Bodhirājakumāra Sutta (85:28) and Saṅgārava Sutta (100:25).
72. ‘As long as my own excrement ... lasted’: For such self-mortifications 
(tapas) of a ‘filth-eater’ addicted to cow-dung, cow-urine, ashes and clay, 
see Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12:49-51).
8. FOLKLORE
1. ‘one hand washes the other...’: Dīgha Nikāya, Soṇadaṇḍa Sutta (4:21). ‘If a 
man’s reputation suffers ...’: Dīgha Nikāya, Soṇadaṇḍa Sutta (4:8 and 26). ‘A 
clean cloth ...’: Kūṭadanta Sutta (5:29).
2. ‘Wife, you are always seeing a crocodile’: Dhammapada Commentary iii, 
192 ff.
3. ‘As a ship’s oars and rudder on dry land’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthavagga] 
4:1.
4. ‘as undisputing as milk with water’: Majjhima Nikāya , Upakkilesa Sutta 
(128:11). Cf. Cūḷagosinga Sutta (31:6) and Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 10:4 [PTS 
vol. 4, 350]. 
5. ‘But here I see bhikkhus living in harmony’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Dhammacetiya Sutta (89:11).
6. ‘as utterly pure and polished as a conch-shell’: See Majjhima Nikāya, 
Kandaraka Sutta (51:13) and Raṭṭhapāla Sutta (82:7). See also ch.4 p. 144.
7. ‘just as a well-trained archer ...’: Majjhima Nikāya , Mahāsīhanāda Sutta 
(12:62).
8. ‘as swiftly as a strong man can flex his extended arm’: Dīgha Nikāya , 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:1.33). Cf. Udāna 8:6 and Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 
6:28 [PTS vol. 4, 229]. Cf. also Brahmā Sahampati’s departure from the 
Brahma-world, Saṁyutta Nikāya  V [Mahāvagga] 47:18; Vinaya-piṭaka, 
Mahāvagga 1:5 [PTS vol. 4, 4].
9. ‘what’s this riff-raff doing here?’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cātumā Sutta (67:3).
10. ‘It beats fishermen landing a prize catch!’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:341-342.
11. ‘such a good-for-nothing gob of spittle’: Vinaya-piṭaka, Cullavagga 7:3 
[PTS vol. 5, 187].

THE BROKEN GONG

12. ‘Idiots, you’ve tried to split a rock’: Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Sagāthavagga] 
4:25.
13. ‘a mountain of solid rock ... the Himalayan range’: Saṁyutta Nikāya II 
[Nidānavagga] 15:6; and Itivuttaka 24 [PTS 17]. A ‘cycle of time’, literally 
transliterated, is an ‘aeon’; a ‘league’, a yojana; a ‘silk handkerchief’, a ‘fine 
Kaasi cloth’; the ‘Himalayan range’, the ‘mountains of the Vepulla range’.
14. ‘suppose a blind turtle popped its head’: Majjhima Nikāya, Bālapaṇḍita 
Sutta (129:24).
15. ‘the Sakyan beauty, Janapadakalyānī’: Udāna 3:2. Prince Nanda was the 
Buddha’s half-brother. Yakshas are Buddhist nymphs, omnipresent among 
the carvings at Sanchi.
16. ‘discussed in ch. 5’: pp. 174-177.
17. ‘Life is easy for ... a crow’: Dhammapada 244.
18. ‘Easy is the livelihood of the crow’: Jātakamāla 16.
19. ‘A crow there was who stalked around’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  IV 
[Sagāthavagga] 4:24 and Sutta Nipāta 3:2.
20. ‘all men blind from birth ... before an elephant’: Udāna 6:4.
21. ‘a partridge, a monkey and an elephant’: Vinaya-piṭaka, Cullavagga 6:6 
[PTS vol. 5, 161-162]. The whole fable is a game of one-upmanship. But 
whether the partridge is yet another trickster-hero is left a moot point.
22. ‘uncanonical Jātaka tale (37)’: The Tittira Jātaka 37 [PTS vol. 1, 217-220]. 
From jāti, ‘birth’.
23. ‘the fable of the Falcon’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 47:6 and Jātaka 
168 [PTS vol. 2, 58-60], which openly quotes the Saṁyutta Nikāya  as its 
source. In the Jātaka version, it is Devadatta who enacts the falcon’s role.
24. ‘the tale of the Wise and Foolish Caravan-Leader’: Dīgha Nikāya, Pāyāsi 
Sutta (23:23) and Jātaka 1 [PTS vol. 1, 95-106].
25. ‘the tale of the Poisoned Dice’: Dīgha Nikāya , Pāyāsi Sutta (23:27) and 
Jātaka 91 [PTS vol. 1, 379-380].
26. ‘the most arresting of all these parallels’: Cf. also the Snake Charm (in 
Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 5:6 [PTS vol. 5, 109-110] and Jātaka 203 [PTS vol. 
2, 145-148] and the Dragon Jewel-Neck (in Vinaya-piṭaka: Suttavibhanga,

NOTES

Sanghādisesa 6:1 [PTS vol. 1, 145-147] and Jātaka 253 [PTS vol. 2, 283-286]) 
for further cross-pollination.
27. ‘her ghastly revenge on Brer Elephant’: Jātaka 357 [PTS vol. 3, 174-177].
28. ‘Even the quail, that small bird’: Used by the Buddha to defend his 
fellow-Sakyans against rebuke for the unparliamentary buffoonery and 
horseplay at their meeting-hall in Kapilavatthu: Dīgha Nikāya , Ambaṭṭha 
Sutta (3:1.14).
29. ‘Reborn as a quail-cock’: Jātaka 33 [PTS vol. 1, 208-210].
30. ‘first relaxed her grip ... then dropped her guard’: The Pali phrases sake 
baleapatthaddhā (literally ‘not stiff or rigid’) and sake bale asaṃvadamānā 
(suggesting disdain) seem to imply that the falcon, in her pride, was 
psychologically lulled into toying with the tiny quail.
31. ‘the Parable of the Monkey appended to it’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  V 
[Mahāvagga] 47:7.
32. ‘these six animals with different ... diets’: Saṁyutta Nikāya  IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:247.
33. ‘uniquely conscious of his reincarnations’: Until aspects of the Jātaka 
became part of the commentary (aṭṭhakathā) on the Dhammapada added by 
Buddhaghosa in the fifth century C.E.
34. ‘as King of the Parrots ... or as a timid fawn’: The tale of the Parrot 
King, loyal to the withered fig-tree in which he roosted, was oddly inserted 
into the commentary on Dhammapada 32. The tale of Devadatta as hunter, 
craftily screened on a bamboo platform, forever violating the laws of 
nature (i.e. miscalculating the effects of kamma, misconstruing his cousin), 
appropriately became part of the commentary on Dhammapada 162.
35. ‘typecasting monks ... by their postures’: See commentary on 
Dhammapada 251.
36. ‘the cautionary tale of Tissa’: See commentary on Dhammapada 240.
37. ‘feud between a housewife and her hen’: See commentary on 
Dhammapada 291.
38. ‘All those who are slaves of desire’: The first half of Dhammapada 347.
39. ‘Jonathan Edwards’: God ‘holds you over the pit of hell, much as one 
holds a spider ... by a slender thread’, Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God 
(1741).

THE BROKEN GONG

40. ‘a bestiary ... could be compiled’: Cf. the even older Yoga (Sanskrit 
for ‘union’, or yoke) bestiary with its Fish, Locust, Cobra, Cat, Camel, etc. 
Indians say there are 84,000 (i.e. an infinite number of) permutations; only 
Shiva can do the lot.
41. ‘miniatures by Mansur’: Mughal artist who worked at the court of the 
Emperor Jahangir (1605-1628).
42. ‘It’s just like a beetle, feeding on dung’: Saṁyutta Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 
17:5. Thus the Zen squelcher to the query: ‘What is Buddha?’ ‘A shitscraper’. See Epilogue.
43. ‘A dung-beetle ... attracted by the smell of dung’: Jātaka 227 [PTS vol. 
II, 211-212].
44. ‘Steeped in lust all beings cower’: Dhammapada 342.
45. ‘Whoever would not lance the lust’: Dhammapada 284. The pun on vana 
(meaning both ‘forest’ and ‘lust’) is echoed here by the auxiliary ‘would’. 
See ch. 7, p. 173. The oppressive image of the milch-calf may, in other 
contexts, be transformed: like that ‘tender calf ... urged on by his mother’s 
lowing’, who ‘too breasted the stream of the Ganges and safely reached the 
further shore’, Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷagopālaka Sutta (34:4).
46. ‘A lazy glutton drowsy from’: Dhammapada 325.
47. ‘The vigilant exert themselves’: Dhammapada 91.
48. ‘A man who has learnt but little’: Dhammapada 152.
49. ‘the equanimity of a water buffalo!’: See Ajahn Chah, A Still Forest Pool, 
eds. Jack Kornfield and Paul Breitner (1985), pp. ix and 42.
50. ‘Puṇṇa, the “ox-duty ascetic”’: Majjhima Nikāya , Kukkuravatika Sutta 
(57:5).
51. ‘Those who dissipated their youth’: Dhammapada 155. For the ‘thirty-six 
streams of desire’, see Dhammapada 339.
52. ‘that jackal howling ... towards dawn’: Saṁyutta Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 
20:11.
53. ‘Standing it suffered, running it suffered’: Ajahn Chah, A Taste of Freedom 
(The Sangha, Wat Pah Nanachat, 1980), pp. 101-102.
54. ‘a dog ... tied with a leash’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:100.

NOTES

55. ‘the “naked dog-duty ascetic” Seniya’: Majjhima Nikāya, Kukkuravatika 
Sutta (57:3).
56. ‘Beware of the cobra’: Majjhima Nikāya, Alagaddūpama Sutta (22:10).
57. ‘What a queer thing ... called “pleasure”!’: Plato, Phaedo, 60. As the 
Buddha is made to say some six hundred years later (by Asvaghosa in his 
Buddhacarita, or Career of the Buddha ): ‘The very conditions which mark 
pleasure also bring in turn pain. Heavy garments and fragrant aloe-wood 
are pleasant in the cold but an annoyance in the heat; and moonbeams and 
sandalwood are pleasant in the heat but a pain in the cold ...’
58. ‘cobras (or nāgas in Sanskrit)’: That is why the section of the Dhammapada 
devoted to the elephant, as supreme emblem, is entitled the Nāgavagga 
(XXIII); and why Arahants, in the Pali Canon, are sometimes addressed 
as nāgas (Majjhima Nikāya, Rathavinīta Sutta [24:17] and Sela Sutta [92:28]). 
Which makes the Buddha, of course, the supreme nāga. In Thailand, to this 
day, the shaved candidate for ordination is called a nak.
59. ‘a “crafty fowler”’: Commentator’s gloss on Dhammapada 252.
60. ‘The world is indeed in darkness!’: Dhammapada 174.
61. ‘Just as his tracks could encompass ...’: See Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāhatthipadapoma Sutta (28:2) and Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 48:54. 
The elephant’s footprint, for the Buddha, represents that fundamental 
virtue encompassing all other virtues, appamāda: an alert moral response 
to everyday life in word and thought and deed. Cf. the wanderer Pilotika 
recognizing the distinctive ‘footprint of a Tathāgata’, Majjhima Nikāya , 
Cūḷahatthipadapama Sutta (27:3 and 19-26).
62. ‘Sir, I can drive an elephant to be trained’: Pessa, the mahout’s son, in 
Majjhima Nikāya, Kandaraka Sutta (51:4).
63. ‘shifted neither his forehooves nor hindhooves’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Dantabhūmi Sutta (125:12).
64. ‘Delight in watchfulness ...’: Dhammapada 327.
65. ‘They lead trained elephants to war’: Dhammapada 321.
66. ‘Too many folk lack self-control’: Dhammapada 320.
67. ‘Mourning for his native forest’: Dhammapada 324. Held in luxurious 
captivity by a rājā, a story goes, Dhanapalaka yearned to take care of his

THE BROKEN GONG

blind old mother. For another bull-elephant in musth, see Dhammapada 
326.
68. ‘If you can find no prudent friend’: Dhammapada 329. Cf. the Buddha’s 
soliloquy at Kosambi: ‘If you can find no trusty friend ... walk like a tusker 
in the woods alone’ (Majjhima Nikāya , Upakkilesa Sutta [128:6, final two 
stanzas]). Cf. also the rhinoceros of the Khaggavisana Sutta (Rhinoceros 
Discourse). Adult bull-elephants are solitary creatures, living away from 
the herd. Some young bulls, on reaching the age of eighteen or twenty, also 
prefer the solitary life, but may keep company with similar males. Such 
young bulls pay the herd only occasional visits.
69. ‘Bull-elephants ... bursting in on ... his meditations’: As, for example, 
in the Guarded Woodland Thicket, having been foiled by the disputatious 
Kosambi bhikkhus (Vinaya-piṭaka : Mahāvagga 10:4 [PTS vol. 4, 351-353]); 
also the instance of the bull-elephant, Nalagiri, a man-killer, maddened 
with alcohol (Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 7:3 [PTS vol. 5, 193-195]).
70. ‘an elephant looking back’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:4.1). 
Which is turned to a point of etiquette by the author of the Milindapañha 
VII, ‘Talk on Similes’, 40 [PTS 398].
71. ‘supreme mahout marshalling his forest bhikkhus’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Dantabhūmi Sutta (125:23).
72. ‘As thoroughbreds from Sind ...’: Dhammapada 322.
73. ‘As a thoroughbred touched by the whip’: Dhammapada 144.
74. ‘Where on earth can be found a man’: Dhammapada 143.
75. ‘Watchful among the unwatchful’: Dhammapada 29.
76. ‘Just as a monkey ranging through a forest’: Saṁyutta Nikāya II 
[Nidānavagga] 12:61.
77. ‘Like a creeping-māluva, cravings’: Dhammapada 334. Such is Buddhist 
usage. According to hunters like Jim Corbett and Kenneth Anderson, though, 
monkeys might equally be viewed as emblematic of vigilance (sāti). Grey 
langurs certainly cannot be accused of having ‘monkey-minds’. Endangered 
by tigers and panthers, they post a watchman in a tall tree as a lookout for 
prowling felines. Alert, with beady black eyes scanning the jungle, he will 
neither feed nor let himself in any way be distracted until relieved as sentry. 
For alarm, the call ‘Ha-aah! Har! Har!’ is repeatedly barked until the tribe 
has scattered to safety.

NOTES

78. ‘Just as an owl on a branch ...’: ‘We are meditators! We are meditators!’ 
phoney Brahmans mock virtuous bhikkhus, Majjhima Nikāya, Māratajjanīya 
Sutta (50:13).
79. ‘If by practising zazen ...’: Sengai’s calligraphic inscription on his 
drawing ‘Meditating Frog’ (Idemitsu Art Gallery, Tokyo). Zazen (meditation 
in Soto Zen) is practised in the zendō, or meditation-hall: eyes open (like a 
frog), trying neither to think nor not to think.
80. ‘Whoever withdraws his senses on all sides’: Bhagavad-gitā ii, 58.
81. ‘As a tortoise draws into his/ shell’: Stanza extemporized in reply to a 
deva, Saṁyutta Nikāya IV [Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:240.
82. ‘As a fish cast up on dry land’: Dhammapada 34.
83. ‘Let a sage call on a village’: Dhammapada 49.
84. ‘The vigilant exert themselves’: Dhammapada 91.
85. ‘Swans follow the path of the sun’: Dhammapada 175.
86. ‘called sīhanāda or “Lion‘s Roar”’: See especially Dīgha Nikāya, KassapaSīhanāda Sutta (8); Udumbarika-Sīhanāda Sutta (25); Cakkavatti-Sīhanāda Sutta 
(26); Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷasīhanāda Sutta (11); and Mahāsīhanāda Sutta (12).
9. MORAL ITINERARIES
 1. ‘Purgatory ... a fairly recent annex’: Thus the odd, if ingenious, fit 
between the opencast hollow of Inferno and the mount of Purgatorio.
2. ‘Unknown before the end of the twelfth century’: ‘Un lieu innomé 
n’existe pas tout à fait ... Entre 1170 et 1200 le mot purgatoire – et donc le 
lieu – est né ... La naissance du Purgatoire est un phénomène du tournant 
du XIIe siècle au XIIIe siècle’, Jacques Le Goff, La Naissance du Purgatoire, 
1981 (trans. The Birth of Purgatory, 1984). Even after 1300, altarpieces 
insisted on the long-established iconography: the free fall of the damned 
en masse (on one side), and the single-minded climb of the sanctified (on 
the other) to where the Holy Family – God the Father, Mary and their Son 
– sat throned in triumph amid the angelic host.
3. ‘the Buddhist afterworld ... divided into three parts’: Known as the 
Thirty-One States or ‘Abodes’. The lowest eleven zones (of the ‘Realm 
of Sense-Desire’) were reserved, from bottom up, for hell-sprites; Titans 
(asuras); Hungry Ghosts (petas); animals of all kinds; devas of the four Great

THE BROKEN GONG

Kings (attended by heavenly musicians); the Thirty-Three Gods (whose 
chief is Sakka); Yāma devas (attending on Yāma, King of the Dead), and 
various other ranks of devas (‘Radiant Ones’); Bodhisattvas; and ‘oncereturners’. The middle ‘Realm of Form’ contained a further sixteen 
untroubled zones for devas, Brahmās and ‘non-returners’ (those who had 
experienced the four lower jhānas, or ‘absorptions’); the highest four zones 
(of the ‘Formless Realm’) were reserved for those who had experienced the 
four higher jhānas.
4. ‘in the heavens there is no path’: Apadam (‘trackless’), Dhammapada 254255.
5. ‘foam of a wave’: Dhammapada 46.
6. ‘“withered gourds” ... in the autumn’: Dhammapada 149.
7. ‘“a mass of sores”, “a nest of diseases”’: Dhammapada 147-148.
8. ‘tortured by ... fever’: Dhammapada 90.
9. ‘Soon, soon, alas, this body here’: Dhammapada 41.
10. ‘enlightenment (or liberation)’: ‘Just as the great ocean has but one 
taste, the taste of salt, so too this teaching has but one taste, the taste of 
freedom’, Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:19; Udāna 5:5; Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 9:1.4.
11. ‘There is no fire like lust ...’: Dhammapada 202 and 251.
12. ‘Why so much laughter, why such joy?’: Dhammapada 146.
13. ‘Bhikkhus, all things are blazing’: ‘The Fire Sermon’, Saṁyutta Nikāya IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:28. For the traditional view of Hell, with bodies raked 
over glowing embers, pierced by red-hot iron stakes, plunged into metal 
cauldrons, see Majjhima Nikāya, Bālapaṇḍita Sutta (129:10-16) and Devadūta 
Sutta (130:10-27).
14. ‘In every cry of every Man’: William Blake, ‘London’, Songs of Experience, 
1794.
15. ‘the ten shackles (saṃyojana)’: Dhammapada 370.
16. ‘The bond of iron, wood or hemp’: Dhammapada 345. See also 384, 397 
and 398.
17. ‘water with swirling currents’: See Dhammapada 339 and 347.
18. ‘bordered by couch-grass and jungle creepers’: Dhammapada 162, 338, 
340 and 356.

NOTES

19. ‘Dante’s relay of sea-borne images’: Beginning at Inferno, canto I, lines 
22-24.
20. ‘Those who delight in watchfulness’: Dhammapada 31.
21. ‘Irrigators guide the water’: Majjhima Nikāya , Angulimāla’s verse 
soliloquy (86:18).
22. ‘an arrow-maker ... a carpenter ... a water-engineer’: See Dhammapada 
33, 80 and 145.
23. ‘to train mules, rein in horses ...’: See Dhammapada 94, 321, 322 and 380.
24. ‘You, too, Kesi, are a professional’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 2:112.
25. ‘But, above all, faith’: Majjhima Nikāya, Bodhirājakumāra Sutta (85:58-59).
26. ‘multiplication tables for accountants’: Dialogue with the accountant 
Moggallāna on ‘progressive training’, Majjhima Nikāya, Gaṇaka Moggallāna 
Sutta (107:2-3).
27. ‘a pair of scales’: Dhammapada 268.
28. ‘a goldsmith after ... melting his grains’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:100.
29. ‘Letting Go (paṭinissagga )’: Literally ‘tossing back’ or ‘surrendering’; so 
‘letting go’.
30. ‘just as the vasika jasmine’: Dhammapada 377.
31. ‘This boat, O bhikkhu, empty out’: Dhammapada 369.
32. ‘When with a mind at peace, a monk’: Dhammapada 373.
33. ‘the bracing tack (uddhaṃ-soto)’: Dhammapada 218.
34. ‘Attachment (upādāna)’: Literally ‘clinging’ or ‘clutching’.
35. ‘Just think how little boys and girls play with mud-pies’: Saṁyutta 
Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 23:2.
36. ‘Some children ... built sand-castles’: Yogācāra Bhūmi Sūtra, ch. iv (c. 284 
CE), Takakusu XV, 211.
37. ‘well-nigh crushed and smothered under [their] load’: Henry David 
Thoreau, Walden, or Life in the Woods (1854), ch. 1, ‘Economy’.
38. ‘Bhaārādānaṃ dukkhaṃ loke’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 22:22.

THE BROKEN GONG

39. ‘It’s as if we were carrying a heavy rock’: Ajahn Chah, Bodhinyāna (Wat 
Pah Nanachat, 1982), pp. 67-68 (revised).
40. ‘Even as a great rock ... a giant rock’: Dhammapada 81.
41. ‘a city-pillar ... a watchtower ... a frontier fortress’: Dhammapada 95, 28 
and 315.
42. ‘a lotus leaf ... a mustard seed’: Dhammapada 336, 401 and 407.
43. ‘the translucent depths of a lake’: Dhammapada 82 and 95.
44. ‘the wise man makes an insular/ retreat’: Dhammapada 25. See ch. 7, p. 
250, and notes.
45. ‘His self is refuge for himself’: In Pali, ‘attā hi attano natho’ (‘self is self’s 
refuge’), Dhammapada 160. See also 380.
46. ‘One’s own good one should never spurn’: Dhammapada 166. To 
have really experienced the Dhamma for oneself – to have achieved 
enlightenment in this world – is not only a great good in itself, but the 
essential requisite for a constructive and enduring love of others.
47. ‘Cherish yourself! But injure none!’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 
3:8.
48. ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself’: Leviticus xix, 18 and Matthew 
xix, 19. Cf. Rabbi Hillel: ‘If I am not for myself, who will be? If I am for 
myself alone, who am I?’.
49. ‘a bamboo-acrobat set up his pole’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 
47:19.
50. ‘you must practise satipaṭṭhāna’: The Four Foundations of Mindfulness: 
contemplation of the body (kāya), of the feelings (vedanā), of the mind 
(citta) and of the Dhamma.
51. ‘Mr Daniell has observed’: Charles Darwin, Journal of Researches into the 
Geology and Natural History of the Various Countries Visited by H.M.S. Beagle 
(1839), ch. 2.
52. ‘The blue mountain is the father of the white cloud’: Shunryu Suzuki, 
Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind (1970), p. 31. Tōzan is the Japanese pronunciation 
of the Chinese name Tung-shan Liang-chieh (c. 807-869 CE).
53. ‘In a little community like ours, my dear’: Fagin in conversation with 
Morris Bolter, alias Noah Claypole; Dickens, Oliver Twist (1837-1839), ch. 43.

NOTES

54. ‘An Arahant is one who has removed the cross-bar’: Majjhima Nikāya, 
Alagaddūpama Sutta (22:30).
55. ‘Poṭṭhapāda, it’s just as if someone were to build a ladder’: Dīgha Nikāya, 
Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (9:37). Cf. Dīgha Nikāya, Tevijja Sutta (13:21).
56. ‘suppose these ascetics and Brahmans were to challenge me’: Poṭṭhapāda 
Sutta (9:43-46). Earlier in the same sutta (9:39-42), the Buddha had analysed 
this illusory ‘acquired self’ into its threefold manifestations: the ‘coarse 
acquired self’ (corresponding to our physical presence); the ‘mindconstituted self’ (created in meditation); and the ‘formless acquired self’ 
(created by consciousness). These three ‘acquired selves’ correspond to the 
three post-mortem realms of ‘Sense Desire’, ‘Form’ and ‘Formlessness’. See 
ch. 1, p. 4.
57. ‘eliminating stains (kilesas)’: The mental defilements of lust (or greed), 
aversion (or anger) and delusion (or obtuse blindness).
58. ‘To study the Buddha Way is to study oneself’: The Sōtō Zen master, 
Dōgen-zenji, Genjō Kōan. These are his first two of five steps in meditation 
practice. Cf. also the famous tenfold sequence of ‘Ox-herding Pictures’ (of 
Zen Buddhism) that illustrate seeking the ox; tracking the ox; glimpsing 
the ox; capturing the ox; training the ox; and losing and forgetting the ox.
59. ‘Having passed a particular step one does not hold on’: The Dhamma 
Teaching of Ācariya Mahā Boowa in London (20 June 1974).
60. ‘My propositions are elucidatory in this way’: The penultimate 
proposition 6.54 of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921).
61. ‘Let go contingency – Time Past’: Dhammapada 348.
62. ‘You who sit on top of a hundred-foot pole’: Ch’ang-sha Ching-ts’en, 
Shōyōroku, Case 79 (trans. Yamada and Aitken, slightly amended).
63. ‘So you’ve climbed to the top of a hundred-foot pole’: Dōgen, Shōbōgenzō 
Zuimonki 111:1.
64. ‘Even as on a rubbish tip’: Dhammapada 58.
65. ‘heedless ones ... now living heedfully’: Dhammapada 172.
66. ‘overcoming the evil ... with good’: Dhammapada 173, Theragātā 872.
67. ‘devoting themselves ... to the Buddha’s teaching’: Literally 
‘buddhasāsana’, Dhammapada 382.

THE BROKEN GONG

68. ‘pure and bright, clear and serene’: Dhammapada 413.
69. ‘the moon follows “the star’s path”’: Dhammapada 208.
70. ‘The sun is bright by day’: Dhammapada 387. By ‘Brahman’ here is meant 
the enlightened Arahant.
72. ‘What track can there be to trace those’: Dhammapada 179-180.
73. ‘Like a flight of swans ... they lift off’: Dhammapada 91. See ch. 8, pp. 
312-313.
74. ‘to “follow the path of the sun”’: Dhammapada 175.
75. ‘“fordfinders” ... to gain “the other side”’: See Dhammapada 383-384. 
The imagery probably derives from the Jains. Mahāvīra Nāthaputta and 
his twenty-three supposed predecessors were called tīrthaṃkaras, or ‘fordfinders’.
76. ‘the Parable of the Raft’: Majjhima Nikāya, Alagaddūpama Sutta (22:13). 
Cf. a variant in the Parable of Headlong Flight, Saṁyutta Nikāya  IV 
[Saḷāyatanavagga] 35:238. For an earlier reference, see ch. 1, p. 11. 
77. ‘loses its value – without ... its inherent truth’: See K. N. Jayatilleke, 
Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge (1963), ch. 7, p. 358. For a parallel lesson 
in paṭinissagga, see the Parable of the Two Looters, Dīgha Nikāya, Pāyāsi Sutta 
(23:29).
78. ‘the Buddha ... as a Magadhan herdsman’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cūḷagopālaka 
Sutta (34).
79. ‘People, eager to cross from shore to shore’: Dīgha Nikāya, 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:1.33-34). See ch. 9, pp. 338-339. The ‘wise’ are 
the noble ones (ariya ) who have crossed the wide river of craving (taṇhā ), 
suspended on the bridge of Noble Insight (ariyāmaggañāṇa), leaving behind 
the marshlands of moral defilement.
10. A DIALOGUE ON SELFLESSNESS
1. ‘wantonly starved to death’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 7:3 [PTS vol. 5, 191].
2. ‘born some time in the c. 560s BCE’: By general consensus the Buddha’s 
lifespan as celebrated in Southeast Asia, of c. 623-543 BCE (making 
him roughly a contemporary of Lao-tzu in China), is pitched too early. 
Throughout this study I have accepted c. 563 BCE as the probable date of 
his birth, making him roughly a contemporary of Zarathustra in Persia

NOTES

and K’ung Fu-tse (Confucius in China). But even that may be premature. A 
case can be made for adjusting his life and times downward by yet another 
half-century to c. 523-443 BCE (making him roughly contemporary with 
Parmenides and Herodotus), or by a further generation later from c. 480-400 
BCE. See Richard Gombrich, The Middle Way, vol. 70, no. 3 (November 1995).
3. ‘the royal physician’: Jīvaka Komārabhacca, to whom a sutta on meateating (Majjhima Nikāya, Jīvaka Sutta [55]) is addressed.
4. ‘worn out by insomnia’: The King was unable to sleep, the Pali 
commentary notes, until after this visit.
5. ‘Transgression overcame me, Lord’: Dīgha Nikāya , Sāmaññaphala Sutta 
(2:99).
6. ‘such essential occupations as that of a domestic, or a farmer’: See also 
ch. 6.
7. ‘“The Fruits of the Homeless Life”’: Maurice Walshe’s title for the 
Sāmaññaphala Sutta (The Long Discourses of the Buddha, Wisdom Publications, 
1987), a translation to which I am indebted for most of the groundwork for 
my own version. A samaṇa is a ‘holy recluse’.
8. ‘Far from contrite, he went ... to war’: Later, King Ajātasattu transferred 
his capital from Rājagaha to Pāṭaliputta (modern Patna). Though a 
principal supporter of Devadatta, he was patron of the First Great Council 
(c. 483 BCE) held within three months of the Buddha’s death, in a cave near 
Rājagaha (modern Rajgir in the state of Bihar).
9. ‘Sāmaññaphala Sutta’: Literally the fruits of the life of a samaṇa, or 
wandering ascetic.
10. ‘On the fast-day called Komudi’: The fortnightly Brahman fast-day (or 
Uposatha) in the fourth month (or Kattika), running roughly from midOctober to mid-November.
11. ‘I visited Pūraṇa Kassapa’: See ch. 2, note 30.
12. ‘Makkhali Gosāla’: See ch. 2, notes 26, 27 and 28.
13. ‘Ajita Kesakambali’: Literally ‘Ajita of the Hairy Garment’; that is, he 
wore a blanket spun from human hair, as other ascetics might wear castoff shrouds or rags from refuse dumps (Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāsīhanāda Sutta 
[8:14]).

THE BROKEN GONG

14. ‘Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta’: Whose given name was Vardhamāna Mahāvīra. 
The title ‘Nigaṇṭha’ literally means ‘free from bonds’. Jain teaching here 
is ridiculed by a paradox: one ‘free from restraints’ being seemingly both 
restrained and absolved from all restraints.
15. ‘an extended variant of the ten dilemmas’: See ch. 2, p. 25. Cf. also Dīgha 
Nikāya, Brahmajāla Sutta (1:2.13-2.40).
16. ‘in both spirit and letter’: Exemplified by the Brahmacariya, or Noble 
Practice of morality (sīla), of concentration (samādhi ) and of wisdom 
(paññā), as perfected by the Buddha and the ariyas.
17. ‘And how … is a monk perfected in his morality?’: The paragraphs 
following (43-62), omitted here, were interpolated from Dīgha Nikāya , 
Brahmajāla Sutta (1:1.8-1.27). Often entitled the Cūḷa Sīla (Short Section on 
Morality), Majjhima Sīla (Middle Section on Morality) and Mahā Sīla (Large 
Section on Morality), they constitute a detailed catalogue of forbidden 
court ornaments, court entertainments, court luxuries, spells and 
predictions (examined in ch. 6, especially p. 136) which, though apt enough 
for King Ajātasattu, are too elaborate for, and clearly supernumerary in, 
this context.
11. A DIALOGUE ON THE AFTERLIFE
1. ‘Elders such as Khemaka and Sāriputta’: See ch. 2, p. 22.
2. ‘its protagonist, known as Young Kassapa’: To distinguish KumāraKassapa from Mahā Kassapa.
3. ‘Ajita Kesakambalī’: Cf. Dīgha Nikāya, Sāmaññaphala Sutta (2:23).
4. ‘Yes, Kālāmas ... you may well doubt’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:65. See ch. 2, p. 46.
5. ‘seeing his soul escape’: Here jīva , literally the ‘life-principle’.
6. ‘coarse, fringed clothing’: Literally ‘fringed with balls’, to weigh the 
garment down.
7. ‘in the company of the Four Great Kings’: That is, one realm above the 
human world, with the reigning devas of the North, the South, the East and 
the West, attended by the heavenly musicians, or gandhabbas.
 8. ‘in the heavenly realm of the Thirty-Three Gods’: Whose chief is Sakka 
and whose realm (one level higher than the four Kings) was once the abode 
of the Titans, or asurās.
 9. ‘the Venerable Gavampati’: One of the Buddha’s early converts.

NOTES

12. TEMPORAL POWERS
1. ‘Eighty-two thousand teachings’: Theragāthā 1024.
2. ‘this cipher ... a commonplace synonym for infinity’: Especially popular 
in a folklore context such as the eighty-four thousand converts from the 
royal city of Bandhumatī who ‘shaved off hair and beard and donned yellow 
robes’ (Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāpadāna Sutta (14:2.16-2.17, 3.14-3.18, and 3.27); 
cf. Dīgha Nikāya, Pāṭika Sutta (24:2.13); or King Mahāsudassana’s fabulous 
eighty-four thousand palaces, each with eighty-four thousand chambers 
and couches, as well as eighty-four thousand gabled halls, elephants, cities, 
carriages, jewels, wives, retainers, cows, bales of clothing, rice-offerings, 
etc. in the fairyland setting of Kusāvatī (Dīgha Nikāya , Mahāsudassana Sutta 
[17:1.26-2.5 and 2.13-2.15]; cf. Jātaka 95).
For parallels, see the Buddha’s exposition of ‘meditation subjects suitable 
for eighty-four thousand temperaments’ (Khuddaka-Pātha, Commentary, 
232); or the conclusion of the Buddha’s talk on the death of the courtesan 
Sirimā, at which ‘eighty-four thousand beings attained realization of the 
Dhamma’ (Dhammapada Commentary, iii, 104); or the Buddha’s smile at 
Mithīla, in Makhādeva’s Mango Grove, at which Ānanda asked: ‘What, 
pray, is the cause of the Exalted One’s smiling?’ and the Buddha replied: 
‘Now, Ānanda, for eighty-four thousand years King Makhādeva diverted 
himself as a royal prince; for eighty-four thousand years acted as viceroy; 
for eighty-four thousand years was King; for eighty-four thousand years, 
in this very mango grove, led the life of a recluse ... And King Makhādeva’s 
son, and his son, and his son, to the number of eighty-four thousand 
warrior princes descended from him, in this very mango grove shaved off 
hair and beard, donned yellow robes and retired from their homes to the 
homeless life’ (Majjhima Nikāya, Makhādeva Sutta [83]); or the Buddha’s 
challenge to Ubbirī, lamenting for his daughter: ‘On this funeral-ground 
have been burned eighty-four thousand daughters of yours. For which 
one of these do you lament?’ (Theragāthā 33, Commentary).
3. ‘Trained Easterners often have an astonishing memory’: Matthieu Ricard 
in The Monk and the Philosopher (1997), trans. John Canti (1998), pp. 21-22.
4. ‘Ānanda, if only you knew’: Udāna 3:3. 
5. ‘Ānanda served as the Buddha’s secretary’: Both Ānanda and Devadatta 
were first cousins of the Buddha. One might call them his good and his evil 
alter ego. Born the same day, Ānanda followed his cousin (it is said) ‘like a 
shadow’ (Theragāthā 1041-43). Gotama married Yasodharā, yet another of 
his many first cousins. Her brother Devadatta, therefore, was not only a

THE BROKEN GONG

cousin but Gotama’s brother-in-law. Three times (it is said) he attempted 
to assassinate the Buddha; and plotted usurping the Buddhist order thirtyseven years after his cousin’s enlightenment (when Gotama was seventytwo). On the Buddha’s death, however, he was decisively rejected as his 
cousin’s successor in favour of a majority rule, with Mahā Kassapa (the 
Buddha’s elder) as the duly elected head (Vinaya-piṭaka : Cullavagga 11:1 
[PTS vol. 5, 285]).
6. ‘warming his back in the evening sun’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 
48:41.
7. ‘his own contract of employment’: Theragāthā 1018-1050 and its 
Commentary iii, 112.
8. ‘the Buddha ... disabled by racking pain’: For this attack of rheumatism 
during the rainy season, see Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.232.24) and Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 47:9.
9. ‘the death of Sāriputta’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 47:13.
10. ‘was this well heard by me …?’: Majjhima Nikāya , Cūḷasuññata Sutta 
(121:3).
11. ‘I’m still a mere novice, alas’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta 
(16:5.13).
12. ‘you have made much merit, Ānanda’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (16:5.14).
13. ‘Mahāpajāpatā Gotamī (the Buddha’s stepmother and aunt)’: Cullavagga 
10:1, Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:51 and Majjhima Nikāya , Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅga Sutta 
(142:3).
14. ‘a needle salesman ... in the presence of a manufacturer of needles’: 
Saṁyutta Nikāya II [Nidāvagga] 16:10.
15. ‘instituting sewing circles’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahāsuññata Sutta (122:2-4) 
and Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 8:12 [PTS vol. 4, 287].
16. ‘organizing group tours’: Mahā Kassapa branded (‘this youngster’) 
Ānanda ‘uncontrolled’ and a ‘destroyer of the corn’, since thirty bhikkhus 
promptly disrobed and left the Sangha (Saṁyutta Nikāya  II [Nidānavagga] 
16:11).
17. ‘Ānanda possesses four remarkable qualities’: Dīgha Nikāya, 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:5.16).

NOTES

18. ‘seemingly spontaneous flow of queries’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:79, 5:106 
and 10:1.
19. ‘friendship ... not half of the holy life’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 
45:2.
20. ‘the doctrine of dependent origination’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahānidāna Sutta 
(15).
21. ‘an explication ... of discourses in prose’: Majjhima Nikāya, Mahasuññata 
Sutta (122:20).
22. ‘He wanted everything on record’: Including the post-mortem 
destinations – or rebirths – of innumerable lay-followers. For which he 
was roundly ticked off: ‘But that you should come to the Tathāgata to ask 
the fate of each of those who have died, that is a weariness to him’ (Dīgha 
Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta [16:2.8]).
23. ‘the Buddha explicitly favoured intuitive wisdom’: Atakkāvacaro, what 
is ‘beyond the sphere of logical thought’, only to be realized by insight. See 
Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāpadāna Sutta (14:3.1).
24. ‘According to the Aṅguttara Nikāya’: 1:19.
25. ‘a monk consolidates ... with the right phrasing’: Majjhima Nikāya , 
Mahāgosinga Sutta (32:4).
26. ‘expert in the traditions’: Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:4.9) 
and Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:180.
27. ‘some rinsing water left in the latrines’: Aṅguttara Nikāya  4:249, 
Dhammapada Commentary i, 5355 and Vinaya-piṭaka: Mahāvagga 10:1.
28. ‘Having heard the Dhamma, memorize it’: Majjhima Nikāya, Cankī Sutta 
(95:20).
29. ‘Anyone claiming, “This is the Dhamma”’: For these four criteria and 
Ānanda’s (implicit) role, Dīgha Nikāya, Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:4.7-4.11); 
also Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:180.
30. ‘I shall now interrogate Ānanda’: Cullavagga 11:1 [PTS vol. 5, 287-291]. 
The Brahmajāla Sutta is the opening sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya.
31. ‘rules ... division of labour ... preservation ... formulaic structure’: The 
Second Great Council (held at Vesālī in c. 383 BCE), it is said, closed the 
Canon of the first four Nikāyas ( Dīgha, Majjhima, Aṅguttara and Saṁyutta) 
and ratified the inauguration of a fifth. The Aṅguttara Nikāya conspicuously

THE BROKEN GONG

adopted the oral device of grouping suttas not by length or subject matter 
only, but by numerical progressions as practised by Sāriputta in the Sangiti 
and Dasuttara Suttas (note 51). The Third Great Council (held at Pāṭaliputta 
under the Emperor Aśoka in c. 253 BCE) divided the canonical collections 
into three ‘baskets’ (piṭakas ): the Sutta-piṭaka, the Vinaya-piṭaka and the 
Abhidhamma-piṭaka. This Pali Tripiṭaka, or Tipiṭaka, was first recorded (with 
Sinhalese commentaries) some four hundred years after the Buddha’s 
death.
32. ‘the ... Analects of Confucius’: So called by the missionary-scholar, James 
Legge, to suggest their true nature as ‘selected passages of discussion and 
commentary’ (1861). The first collection of the sayings of K’ung Fu-tse, like 
the Tipiṭaka, was recorded in the first century BCE.
33. ‘Demodokos among the Phaeacians’: Odyssey VIII 62-82, 266-366 and 
485-520.
34. ‘Milman Parry and Albert Lord’: See Albert B. Lord, The Singer of Tales 
(Harvard University Press, 1960) as well as G. S. Kirk, The Songs of Homer and 
Homer and the Oral Tradition (Cambridge University Press, 1962 and 1977).
35. ‘the “singer” ... from the “rhapsode”’: See Gregory Nagy, Poetry as 
Performance: Homer and Beyond (Cambridge University Press, 1997).
36. ‘spontaneously in performance’: For which Greek poets, unlike the 
Buddha, invoked the Muses for ‘inspiration’.
37. ‘Knowing what comes first and later’: Theragāthā 1028-1029.
38. ‘skilful in the ways of language’: Dhammapada 352. Four distinct types 
of Arahant are mentioned in the suttas. The Paṭisambhidapatto apart, these 
are the ‘impassive’ (literally ‘dry-visioned’) Sukkhavipassako Arahants, 
liberated by insight (vipassanā ) alone without acquiring psychic powers; 
and the Tevijjo and Chalabhiñño: Arahants with respectively threefold and 
sixfold psychic powers (recalling past lives, clairvoyance, clairaudience, 
etc.). See ch. 3, pp. 75-76 and ch. 10, p. 355.
39. ‘What, great King, is the Jewel’: Nāgasena in debate with King Milinda 
(or Menander, the Hellenistic ruler of Bactria), Milindapañha V, ‘A Question 
Solved by Inference’ [PTS 339].
40. ‘Nirutti, roughly “grammar”’: From Sanskrit nirukti, or ‘etymology’. 
Every analytical tool was stamped with its own health warning: Always 
stay aware that these are only expedient means within a conventional 
system of signs. Never conceive grammatical inflections to be absolutes.

NOTES

Never be deceived into mistaking them for labels, or clues, or blueprints 
of a hidden ‘reality’. Especially the pronouns ‘I’/‘me’ and the possessive 
adjective ‘mine’ should not be taken as proof of a controlling agent or 
independent object (attā).
It is the ‘unskilled’, ‘undisciplined’ worldling (Puthujjana ) who ‘conceives 
earth; conceives in earth; conceives from earth; conceives “earth is mine”; 
he delights in earth’ (Majjhima Nikāya 1, Mūlapariyāya Sutta, or ‘Discourse 
on the Root of Existence’). That is, he locates himself within the declension 
of a single noun, always appropriating it to himself and rotating himself 
through its various accusative, locative or ablative cases, etc. An expanded 
version might run: ‘Having perceived earth as earth, he conceives himself 
as earth; he conceives himself in earth; he conceives himself apart from 
earth ...’ So the ego intrudes into all grammatical inflections and cases, 
indiscriminately claiming its substance, location and sovereign rights. Cf. 
Bhikkhu Bodhi, ‘The Discourse on the Root of Existence’ (Kandy: Buddhist 
Publication Society, 1980), p. 12. See ch. 1, p. 6.
41. ‘deconstructing its constituent signs’: Both syntagmatic (nirutti ) and 
paradigmatic.
42. ‘gone to the Unconditioned’: Literally ‘liberated from the saṇkhāras (the 
compounded)’, Dhammapada 154.
43. ‘Mahā Koṭṭhita ... posing the questions’: To Sāriputta, for example, 
in Majjhima Nikāya , Mahāvedalla Sutta (43) (the ‘Greater Discourse on 
Explanations’) and Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:173, on the limits of the explainable. 
See ch. 1, p. 2.
44. ‘Brahman grammarians (vaiyākaraṇas)’: Or veyyākaraṇas, from Sanskrit 
vyākaraṇa: ‘undoing’ or ‘unpicking’ words, sentences and so any linguistic 
phenomenon.
45. ‘the Unsurpassed Wheel of Dhamma’: Saṁyutta Nikāya I [Sagāthāvagga] 
8:7.
46. ‘one who had heard Dhamma-Vinaya’: Vinaya-piṭaka: Cullavagga 7:4 [PTS 
vol. 5, 200-201].
47. ‘He analysed each jhāna ... in turn’: Majjhima Nikāya, Anupada Sutta (111).
48. ‘the Niddesa and Paṭisambhidā Suttas ’: Khuddaka Nikāya , books 11 and 
12. The Mahā Niddesa is a commentary on the Aṭṭhaka-vagga of the Sutta 
Nipāta (Khuddaka Nikāya, book 5); the Cūḷa Niddesa, on the Pārāyaṇa-vagga 
and Khaggavisana Suttas.

THE BROKEN GONG

The Paṭisambhidā Magga further contains a mixed bag of treatises on 
mindfulness of breathing, vipassanā, etc. 
The Buddha himself, as observed on several occasions, commented on 
the last two books of the Sutta Nipāta. Sāriputta’s analytical commentary 
concentrates on lists of synonyms and a descriptive glossary of terms such 
as particles (nirutti); and an interpretation of the context (broadly aṭṭha 
and dhamma) supported by quotations from the Buddha (paṭibhāṇa).
49. ‘legendary contributions to the Abhidhamma’: Purportedly preached by 
the Buddha to his mother, Rani Siri Mahāmāyā, who had been reborn a 
deva. Every day, for three months, the Buddha returned to earth to give 
Sāriputta a sampling of the method (naya) of his ever-proliferating text.
50. ‘one ancient commentator’: Aṭṭhasālini, the commentary to the Dhammasangaṇī. The Paṭṭhāna is the seventh and last book of the Abhidhamma. Both 
the detailed analysis of jhāna-consciousness in the Dhamma-sangaṇī and its 
closing section (the Atthuddhāra-kaṇḍa, or ‘synopsis’) too were probably 
composed by Sāriputta.
51. ‘analytical rigour ... in his own teaching’: Cf. Majjhima Nikāya, Sammādiṭṭhi 
Sutta (9) (On Right Understanding); Mahāhatthipadopama Sutta (28) (The 
Greater Discourse on the Elephant Footprint); and Mahāvedalla Sutta (43) 
(the question-and-answer session with the Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita). See 
especially the expanding numerical clusters (‘In growing groups from one 
to ten I’ll teach’) of the Sangīti Sutta and Dasuttara Sutta (Dīgha Nikāya 33-34).
52. ‘A monk who is liberated’: Majjhima Nikāya, Dīghanakha Sutta (74:13-14).
53. ‘It was half a month after my ordination’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:172.
54. ‘No thoughts struck me’: Saṁyutta Nikāya III [Khandhavagga] 28:1-9.
55. ‘Even the Buddha once enquired’: Majjhima Nikāya, Piṇḍapāta-pārisuddhi 
Sutta (151:2).
56. ‘wholly absorbed ... in ... bhava-nirodho’: Aṅguttara Nikāya  10:7. Not 
‘existence’ in a metaphysical sense, but rather the cessation of ‘becoming’ 
in a cycle of rebirth. Sāriputta continued: ‘One perception of nibbāna arose 
and another ceased, just as from a log fire one flame arises and another 
ceases ...’
57. ‘The essence of Dhamma ... so well penetrated by Sāriputta’: Saṁyutta 
Nikāya II [Nidānavagga] 12:32.
58. ‘How obliging ... to his brothers’: Saṁyutta Nikāya V [Mahāvagga] 47:13.

NOTES

59. ‘a “system-building successor”’: Jasper Griffin, ‘Plato’s Grand Design’, 
New York Review, vol. XLVI, no. 8 (May 6, 1999), p. 41.
60. ‘absorption where words cannot penetrate’: Udāna 3:3.
61. ‘So, Ānanda, live as an island unto yourself’: Dīgha Nikāya , 
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (16:2.26), in (part) response to Ānanda’s pathetic 
plea: ‘Lord, my body tottered; everything grew dim and my head swam 
because of the Lord’s sickness ...’ (2.24).
EPILOGUE
1. ‘When muffled as a broken gong’: Dhammapada 134. 
2. ‘in Lao-tzu’s formulation’: From the Tao Te Ching, whose opening line, 
punning on Tao (which may mean both ‘the way’ and ‘to speak’), runs: ‘the 
Tao which can be spoken is not eternal Tao’.
3. ‘But tell me – does the sound come to the ear’: The Gateless Barrier: The 
Wu-men Kuan (Mumonkan), translated with a commentary by Robert Aitken 
(San Francisco: North Point Press, 1990), Case 16, p. 107.
4. ‘Every art seems tedious’: Epictetus, Discourses, book 2, ch. 14.
5. ‘Don’t offer a poem’: The Gateless Barrier, ed. Aitken, Case 33, p. 204.
6. ‘Can someone else be a man’s teacher ...’: Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
Philosophical Investigations, II, p. 277.
7. ‘Study [togpa] is of no use in gaining true knowledge [togspa]’: The 
Gomchen of Sakyong, in Alexandra David-Neel, With Mystics and Magicians 
in Tibet (first English edition, 1931), ch. 2, p. 58.
8. ‘What we know is never the object’: Howard Nemerov, Figures of Thought 
(1975).
9. ‘Bamboo shadows sweep the stairs’: Zenrin Kushū. For an alternative 
translation, see A Zen Forest (1981), translated by Sōiku Shigematsu, no. 770.
10. ‘The Dhamma is like a raft’: Majjhima Nikāya, Alagaddūpama Sutta (22). 
See ch. 1, p. 12 and ch. 9, pp. 336-337.
11. ‘beauty and eloquence ... directly experiencing enlightenment’: Thomas 
Cleary and J. C. Cleary, The Blue Cliff Record (1977), vol. 1, p. xxii.
12. ‘both sink into the water and yet not sink’: Cf. the Buddha: ‘If I stood 
still, I sank; if I struggled, I was carried away. Thus by neither standing still

THE BROKEN GONG

nor struggling, I crossed the stream’ (of life and death), Saṁyutta Nikāya I 
[Sagāthāvagga] 1:1.
13. ‘A special transmission outside the scriptures’: The Zen schools like to 
trace their lineage even further back to Mahā Kassapa who alone broke into 
a smile, it is said, when the Buddha twirled a flower before the assembly. So 
to him was entrusted this ‘special transmission’, they claim, not founded 
upon ‘words or phrases’. See Case 6.
14. ‘the Way is not subject to knowing or not knowing’: The Gateless Barrier, 
ed. Aitken, Case 19, p. 126. Chao-chou is more generally known by his 
Japanese name Jōshū.
15. ‘“I won’t say living; I won’t say dead”’: Recounted in The Blue Cliff Record, 
eds. Cleary and Cleary, vol. 2, p. 365.
16. ‘Your mind is always running after the objects’: D. T. Suzuki, Essays in 
Zen Buddhism: Second Series (1976), pp. 231-232.
17. ‘If you say, “Yes” ... If you say, “No”’: Thomas Cleary, Book of Serenity  
(1990), p. 176.
18. ‘bow, arrow, goal and ego’: Eugen Herrigel, Zen in the Art of Archery 
(1953), p. 70.
19. ‘Passing by the bathroom ...’: Yoel Hoffman, Radical Zen: The Sayings of 
Jōshū (1978), p. 17. Nan-ch’üan is more generally known by his Japanese 
name Nansen.
20. ‘even a trifling bit of excrement’: Aṅguttara Nikāya 1:18, para. 13. See 
‘The Dung-Beetle’, ch. 8, pp. 301-302.
21. ‘what is unutterable ... – unutterably – contained’: Wittgenstein, letter to 
Paul Engelmann, 9 April, 1917.
22. ‘trying to say what can only be shown’: Ray Monk, Ludwig Wittgenstein : 
The Duty of Genius (1990), p. 156. Cf. ch. 2, p. 70.
23. ‘The purpose of words is to convey ideas’: Quoted ch. 1, p. 12.
24. ‘And if there were only/ the moon’: Spoken to Oets Bouwsma at night, 
on the hill overlooking Cornell, in 1949; see Wittgenstein: Conversations, 
1949-1951, p. 12.
25. ‘ever alert to the comic potential of this bleak predicament’: ‘And 
preferring what?’ Samuel Beckett was asked in the first of three dialogues 
with the editor of Transition, Georges Duthuit, published in 1949. He

NOTES

answered: ‘The expression that there is nothing to express, nothing with 
which to express, nothing from which to express, no power to express, no 
desire to express, together with the obligation to express’ (Three Dialogues 
with Georges Duthuit, 1965, p. 103).

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivatives
4.0 International License. To view a copy of this license,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you
follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link
to the license, and indicate if changes were made.You may do
so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests
the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Noncommercial: You may not use the material for
commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or
technological measures that legally restrict others from doing
anything the license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the
material in the public domain or where your use is permitted by
an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the
permissions necessary for your intended use. For example,
other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may
limit how you use the material.

DHAMMA MOON PUBLICATIONS
CITTAVIVEKA
CHITHURST
PETERFIELD GU31 5EU 
UK
CONTACT: OFFICE@CITTAVIVEKA.ORG
 2019 © DHAMMA MOON
ISBN: 978-1-9993704-0-4
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE EBOOK AT
DHAMMAMOON.ORG
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
 
COVER, ILLUSTRATION AND BOOK DESIGN:
NICHOLAS HALLIDAY • HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
EDITORS: AJAHN SUCITTO AND LISA GORECKI
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT, TRANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN
ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA PLEASE CONTACT
OFFICE@CITTAVIVEKA.ORG
IF YOU WISH TO TRANSLATE THIS TEXT IT MUST BE TAKEN FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT
HTTP:/ /CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND/4.0/
SEE OPPOSITE FOR MORE DETAILS ON YOUR
RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS UNDER THIS LICENSE
THIS EDITION PRINTED IN THE UK, 2019



Dhamma Moon
w h e n, m u f f l e d a s a  b r o k e n g o n g,
yo u  d o n’t  r e v e r b e r at e,
yo u ’v e r e ac h e d n i b b ā n a:
r e c r i m i n at i o n’s  t u r m o i l f i n a l ly s t i l l e d i n yo u .
Dhammapada 134
