CopperCopper
IsleIsle
MilesMiles
Ajahn Amaro
Front cover - final.indd   1Front cover - final.indd   1 04/12/2021   15:4304/12/2021   15:43

Copper Isle Miles
by Ajahn Amaro
A Pilgrimage in Sri Lanka – 
Moving Images, Flowing Dhamma
Copper Isle.indb   1 05/12/2021   15:44

To the Sangha 
of Aloka Vihara 
who wrote the Pali down 
for the first time.
Copper Isle.indb   2 05/12/2021   15:44

The Copper Isle
Copper Isle.indb   3 05/12/2021   15:44

iv
Preface
/T_his photo-journal records a pilgrimage made in Sri Lanka in November 
of 2019. I had been invited numerous times to visit this ancient 
seedbed of /T_heravāda Buddhism but, prior to this present occasion, had 
always declined the oﬀers. /T_he reason for this was not a disinterest in 
the country, with its ancient Buddhist traditions and numerous holy 
places, rather it was that, if I was going to go, I wanted to go quietly 
as a pilgrim and not on a teaching tour or part of a bustling group of 
devotees. Sometimes I wondered if I was being too fussy or narrow on 
this score but, in retrospect, I am very glad to have waited for forty years 
to make the journey. 
During the late 1990s and early 2000s I would make brief visits to 
Amaravati Monastery every year. I was living at Abhayagiri Monastery in 
California during that time and I would come to the UK once annually 
to attend Elders’ Council meetings with the Sangha in Europe. I /f_irst 
met Ajahn Vinita in 2005 on one of those trips and, subsequently, we 
crossed paths on many occasions. He had always impressed me as one 
who was cheerful, unsel/f_ish, fully committed to the monastic life and to 
the practice of the Forest T radition ways under the guidance of Luang 
Por Sumedho. When I moved to Amaravati in 2010, to take over as 
abbot on Luang Por’s retirement, Ajahn Vinita had always been helpful 
and supportive in every way.
Within the /f_irst few years after I had arrived and settled in at Amaravati 
the question arose of whether I would be interested to go to Sri Lanka 
one day. After all, I had named the monastery in California after a 
famous Sri Lanka institution, the original Abhayagiri Vihāra having 
/f_lourished for about 1250 years, between roughly 80 BCE to 1170 CE. 
I mentioned to Ajahn Vinita the concern that I had, that I would like 
‘to go quietly as a pilgrim’ and he was completely sympathetic with 
that. It took a few more years for the conditions to come together but 
eventually, by sometime in 2017, we began to make serious plans. 
/T_he account of the journey, and the re/f_lections around it that are gathered 
here, should be considered the perspective of a single Western bhikkhu, 
encountering the shrines, forests and lanes of Tambapanni for the /f_irst 
time. It is not intended to be a comprehensive commentary on Buddhist 
history, or Buddhist practice in the present day – some places were 
missed, some people have certainly been forgotten along the way – rather, 
dear reader, it is intended to be a collage of impressions, assembled and 
arranged to represent one angle of view upon a unique spiritual culture, 
set among the living jewels of the Copper Isle. 
May any blessings that come from these pages be of bene/f_it to all beings 
and conduce to the peace and well-being of Sri Lanka.
Copper Isle.indb   4 05/12/2021   15:44

v
Acknowledgements
/T_his pilgrimage, and thus this present book, could not have come into 
being without the initiative, patience, generosity and diligence of Ajahn 
Vinita. My gratitude and appreciation is thus extended to him /f_irst and 
foremost. Not only did he catalyze the opportunity for me to go to Sri 
Lanka on this /f_irst ever visit, but he also drew together every thread 
necessary for the event to work in a way that was inspiring, highly 
educational and in accordance with all my wishes – sādhu anumodanā!
/T_he practical details of funding all our travels, and for helping to arrange 
many of the locations visited, were taken care of by many lay friends of 
Amaravati: Harshini Vitarane, Amila T romp, Randula Haththotuwa, 
Nelum Perera and others. 
On the ground, assisting with all the logistics of who would host us and 
where we would stay and where eat, I would like to express my gratitude 
to Rohan Silva and Sumangala Dias, together with Kanishka Levangama, 
the Nipuna Gamlath family in Polonnaruwa, Rohana and Chandrika 
Haththotuwa, Sandamali and Lakshman Hettiarachchi, Indika Nettigama 
and Arran Sivarajah, and Kushan Perera, who were all unstinting in their 
generosity and their desire to help us along the path of our pilgrimage. 
In this group, I would especially like to thank Lassal Haththotuwa who 
volunteered to drive us for the whole journey, without fully realizing that 
it would be about 2000 miles of road travel in less than three weeks. He 
put his life, and the running of his medical supply factory, on hold for 
the entirety of this time of the pilgrimage and he was unreserved in his 
readiness to adapt to circumstances along the way.  
In addition, the quiet and ever-helpful presence of Ajahn Appamado was a 
blessing to us all throughout the journey.
/T_he crystallizing of this photo-journal into the form it is seen here, 
dear reader, is /f_irstly due to Adam Long’s careful transcription of 
my handwritten diary – scrawled as it was in small letters and with 
numerous asterisks and arrows for the marginalia. /T_he design and layout 
of the book was done by the discerning hand and eye of Mark Gatter, 
who generously oﬀered to work on this project as he had done with 
other journeys: Rain on the Nile, /T_he Hush at the End of the World and 
Feeding the Cedars. I am extremely grateful for his generosity as well 
as the unique skills he brings in rendering these timeless moments of 
presence, in holy places, into physical form.
/T_he photographs which include me in the picture were mostly taken by 
Lassal. /T_he high quality close-up pictures, in Yala National Park, were 
taken by Indika Nettigama; I am grateful that he has generously allowed 
these to be published here. /T_he other pictures were taken by myself.
T o all these good people, to our Buddhist ancestors who shaped the 
rocks and histories there, and to the other beings of the fourteen biomes 
of the Copper Isle, I express my deepest gratitude. May any blessings 
that arise from the words and pictures gathered here bene/f_it them and all 
beings. Sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhitattā!
Amaro Bhikkhu
Amaravati
Spring, 2021
Copper Isle.indb   5 05/12/2021   15:44

Copper Isle.indb   6 05/12/2021   15:44

1

Brief encounters, fellow travellers recognize a commonality of purpose, 
destination. We cross paths, sit side by side and breathe the air together unwitting 
of each other’s names and stories. Who are you, the German-speaking Asianlooking fellow to my right? Who the English couple perusing today’s Sun? What 
is your tale, white-bearded man with turquoise turban, transparent as a veil? 
Crumpled girl, your knees up, feet upon the seat, smiling with phone pressed to 
your ear, who are you talking to?
We share a life together; a heart, a mind, a /f_i  eld of perception is the world we each 
know – not the world but each of our minds’ representation of the world. 
– –
/T_h  at which knows the world is not of the world: What is ‘the world’ in this 
Dhamma and discipline? /T_h  e eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind – that is what 
is called ‘the world’. /T_h  at whereby one is a perceiver and a conceiver of the world 
– these are the six senses – that is the fabric of this mind’s version of the world (S 
35.116). 
/T_h  at which know the person is not a person – this hand holding its pen, this 
vermillion ribbon, slanting across the page – where are they? ‘Here’ does not 
really apply as it implies a ‘there’ some other place but there is only this... but 
‘this’ implies a separate ‘that’ some other time, some other place... Dhamma is 
not de/f_i  ned by location, time, identity: ‘/T_h  at material form, feeling, perception, 
mental formations, consciousness whereby one trying to describe the Tathāgata – 
the element of knowing, vijjā-dhātu – would describe him has been cut oﬀ   at the 
Tuesday, November the 12th – 
Heathrow Airport - Colombo
Copper Isle.indb   1 05/12/2021   15:45

2

root, made like a palm tree stump, deprived of the conditions for existence and 
rendered incapable of arising in the future. /T_h  e Tathāgata [vijjā-dhātu] is liberated 
from being reckoned in terms of form, feeling, perception, mental formations and 
consciousness – he, it, that, this, is profound, immeasurable, unfathomable like 
the great ocean’ (M 72.20).
– –
/T_h  e mind is not a person – the mind is Dhamma. /T_h  e Buddha sees the Dhamma, 
the mind knows itself. 
Riding the wave of a November moon – full, warm and benevolent – our vessel 
lifts and leaves the lights of the surface far below us. Helpful presences pass along 
the aisles, as if wafted on mild breezes, to adjust lights and seats, to provide balm 
and benevolence. An Amaravati regular is excited to be in the seat behind me: ‘Are 
you going to Colombo?’ ‘Well, I’m on the plane.’ Like the interested tour operator 
in the lounge, from Lanka Sport Reizen, who wanted to direct me to a monastery 
in a special forest in Colombo, there is eagerness to be involved, to help, to know, 
to comment.
– –
Are troubles left behind? /T_h  e land vanishes and blackness /f_i  lls the windows, the 
struggles and clashes, anguishes and devastations, the warm spreading smiles and 
anxious decisions now sit in memory but are they less real now? Were they real 
then, when being processed face to face? /T_h  ere is seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, 
touching, thinking, imagining, remembering – where is it? How solid is it? 
/T_h  en in memory – if the heart clings, prefers, pursues its images, how is it all less 
real than before? If the heart’s attention is born into the form, life begins and rolls 
on – jātipi dukkhā. If there is no birth, no becoming, no conforming to ‘that’ – 
atammayatā – then, even in the presence of anguished agitation, no troubles began 
in the /f_i  rst place so there is nothing to be left behind – geography is not the issue, 
at least not that of rūpa-khandha. In Dhamma there is no geo- and no -graphy 
either; no world and no measurement. Perhaps there is lokasaññī – perceiving the 
Copper Isle.indb   2 05/12/2021   15:45

3

world – but lokamānī is not formed; there is no conceiving, no such dis-ease of 
the heart. No long, no short, no coarse, no /f_i  ne, no pure and no impure, no here 
or there, no coming, going or standing still, it is anidassana, non-manifestative.
Are the saris of the stewardesses green or blue? How about these packets of Sri 
Lankan Airlines sugar? It depends on the eyes and the mind alone. /T_h  ey are no 
colour from their own side. T roubles aren’t really troubles, that’s why they are 
called ‘troubles’. 
– –
Lights in the dark; dozens of orange patches, human habitations, glow below 
the window. T urkey passes by: Mu/uni015F, Solhan, Varto, Hınıs, Erzurum... a poem of 
pulses, the beat of life, written on the land. What are their stories? /T_h  eir names? 
/T_h  eir loves and losses? It’s the small hours here – some winter revellers might be 
looking up as I write hearing the sound of a plane far above, see our lights, white 
and red, as we sing upon the airs above. Do they wonder who we are? Where we 
are going?
‘Where are they going?’ My cousin Richard once asked of a passing ship, seen 
from the restaurant of our family hotel, the Bellevue Britannia, Ostend, when 
I was not yet quite two years old. Apparently, allegedly, I spoke in a deep voice, 
saying, ‘/T_h  ey are going wherever the ship is taking them’ or somesuch. Which was 
strangely well-formed grammar for a not-quite-two-year-old, if the story is true, 
of course. /T_h  is also (again, as the story has repeatedly been told) nearly gave my 
aunt, seated at my side, a heart attack.
Where are we going? Who can go anywhere, really? /T_h  e mind, all our minds 
are exactly, precisely here – a ‘here’ without a ‘there’, the place of non-abiding: 
/uni015Eırnak, Lake Van, Cadir Dag/caron.cap i, Muradiye, Ahlat, Bulanık – syllables that indicate 
memories, perceptions, the feelings of ownership, othership, conventions of ‘here 
and there’. Where is the world? On the map-screen? Outside the window? In this 
mind? 
‘In this fathom long body, with its perceptions and thoughts, is the world, the 
Copper Isle.indb   3 05/12/2021   15:45

4

origin of the world, the cessation of the world and the way leading to the cessation 
of the world’ (S 2.26, A 4.45 ). A glowing screen, white and lime-yellow words 
pasted over depictions, depixellations, of mountains and lakes, beside it the 
window, words encoded in neon puddles of street-lamp alphabets; names written 
in light, words understood, mysterious.
What is a real language? Who is reading it? T o the night-hunters around Hakkâri, 
Sālmās, Dilezi Gecidi, the gleaming bars and balls spell ‘success’ and ‘a full belly’, 
‘prey found’, ‘you have reached your destination’. Mosul, Lake Dukan, Arbil, 
Lake Urmia, Maragheh, Nahr Zab Al Kabir, Tabriz – words that evoke war and 
crisis, black /f_l  ags, luminous wisdom of Shams and Rumi, signals and tokens of 
the human imprint on the earth, on the communal psyche. Lines on the map, 
borders between nations, fought for with bitter vehemence, are invisible, markless 
in the bible-black, starless oval framed by the window. Do the owls know the 
human birders? /T_h  e humans, do they know the territories of the foxes, quartering 
their patches, lines written in pungent quatrains of urine, musk and instinct, 
temptation and threat. Are the borders, demarcations, real or not? Who reads 
them? What language do they speak? What is it like to be a bat?
Sulaymaniyah, Qara Dagh, Abae Sriram, Samarra, Baghdad, Isfahan, Basrah, 
Kuwait, the Caspian Sea, Parthia, Armenia, Ashgabat and Georgia – ‘… always 
on my my my my my my my my my mind.’ Where are we? /T_h  e world happens 
exactly here ‘the place which is no place’; no one ever really goes anywhere as 
‘place’ only applies to rūpa-khandha, to the nāma-khandhas it has no meaning, like 
‘the weight of silence’ or ‘the smell of gravity’ ‘the colour of peace’ or ‘the /f_l  avour 
of leftness’, ‘horse Monday yellow’ and Chomsky’s ‘colourless green ideas sleep 
furiously’. 
No one ever really goes anywhere but, nonetheless, we seem to be turning, to keep 
out of Iranian air-space, an inclination to the south to keep us, in this metal tube 
35,000 feet above solid ground, safe from danger.
“What will I do, oh friends?
I do not know myself.
I am neither Christian nor Jew...”
Despite being baptised in the Church of England and con/f_i  rmed by Dr Ramsay, 
Copper Isle.indb   4 05/12/2021   15:45

5

Archbishop of Canterbury; despite my mother being born as Doris Goldschmidt, 
in Golders Green, to a Catholic mother; despite having IB Horner, the late 
President of the Pali T ext Society, as a cousin of my father.
“...Neither Muslim or Hindu.
I am not of the East or the West...”
Despite being born in Kent as a person, and born in Ubon as a bhikkhu.
“Nor of the circling stars.
My place is the placeless.
My face is the faceless.
Oh Shams of Tabriz,
I have no tale to tell!”
“No dust
Nowhere to fall.”
T urkmenistan, Yerevan, Baku, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, Qatar, Amarah, Nasiriyah, 
Al Diwaniyah, Karbala, Abadan, Failakah Island – no landing place. 
– –
/T_h  e Indian Ocean, the Island of Das and its nearby partner Zirku – no lines as 
morning light brings blueness and warmth to it all.
– –
Curling seashore sand-/f_l  ats of Abu Dhabi, Abu Al Abyad, give way to windwashed acres of desert – blue surrenders to pale ochre. A day begins. 
– –
Copper Isle.indb   5 05/12/2021   15:45

Copper Isle.indb   6 05/12/2021   15:45

7

Muddy rivers wind in the green – clay tile roofs orange in the leafy sea. How are 
we near a city?
– –
A delegation meets me at the gangway oﬀ   the plane: the Deputy Inspector 
General of police, Rohan Silva, who looks after the security of the President, and 
is married to one of the /T_h  ree Sisters of Ottawa; a cousin of his is also present. 
Rohan took care of Luang Por Sumedho’s travels when he came here two years 
ago, with Luang Por Viradhammo and Luang Por Pasanno. Here too is his wife, 
son and Kanishka, a retired businessman, along with the security staﬀ   whose 
names, of course, I am not given.
Ajahn Vinita is all smiles and, after a cup of tea, we are on the road with Kanishka 
and his driver: ‘/T_h  e most important person in the vehicle!’ I declare to the 
latter, both a truth and endeavouring to make a nod at the social strati/f_i  cations 
that abound. Later, as we made our way along the narrow track to Springhill 
Monastery, through a steeply-sloping garden in Kandy, I remarked, ‘It’s very good 
to be with Sri Lankans who are not doctors, engineers and accountants – it’s a very 
skewed picture in the UK so I’m glad to meet the other 98% of the population.’ 
You never know how such comments are received but it’s valuable to at least oﬀ  er 
a perspective – a diﬀ  erent view in order to rejig the habits of conditioning.
Along the road we roll through the rural south, coconut palms abound, with a 
Wednesday the 13th – 
Colombo-Kandy
Copper Isle.indb   7 05/12/2021   15:45

8

wall of green around us when we’re not passing through the little market towns 
along the way. Beside us stalls of bananas, of a dozen varieties, /f_l  y by, coconuts 
predictably and racks of colourful clothes at the local weekly markets. School-kids 
out at half past one in the afternoon, /f_i  nished for the day (or so I was then told) 
trooping home in their clutches, chatting and ambling in bright white uniforms.
/T_h  e roads are good: well-maintained and free of potholes, the traﬃ   c is more 
orderly than India – and hardly any horns! /T_h  ere is almost no rubbish either on 
the roadside; a testimony to a caring council or a natural civic sense that makes 
people tidy up after themselves. Few people seem to smoke and there are no 
beggars at the junctions in Narammala. It is very impressive in its easy orderliness.
We pause for a fruit juice at the ninety-year-old house of Kanishka’s mother-inlaw, Sriyāni Senarath, meeting the place, the family (in person and in pictures) 
and the ambience of well-worn colonial architecture, the warmth of a wellloved and lived-in home. She had been there since her marriage at eighteen (as 
in one of the proud line of pictures on the courtyard wall) and she was now a 
comfortable eighty-two, with six grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. 
Warm farewells and we climb steadily into the hills approaching Kandy. /T_h  e name 
comes, predictably (possibly) from ‘khandha’ meaning lump or a hill, a heap, then 
mispronounced by the Europeans.
Climbing, climbing, winding through twisted turns to a tea estate where the 
world’s only (so I’m told) tea museum resides. /T_h  e monastery is on a forested 
corner of the estate, founded by the uncle of the two monk brothers who lead the 
community here and whose father, a retired oﬃ   cial of the government building 
authority, oversaw the construction of the buildings and still does so. It shows, as 
all the paths and steps, buildings are well-made and sturdy.
I’m up in the highest kut·ī on the property: ‘/T_h  e highest monk in Kandy’ states 
Ajahn Vinita. Possibly, by geography but that is not what matters. Moonlight 
snow lies on every surface of the forest canopy.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   8 05/12/2021   15:45

9
Dawn comes to the forest rapidly. Salmon-orange washes in 
the sky are gone in a blink. Birds waken that are roused by 
light and colour; owls hoot their last, hunting over for the 
night. Bright blossoms of the bladder-/f_lower trees ignite, 
glowing coals revived from the grey ashes of the dark.
– –
Breakfast is a formal aﬀair, for our visit, with alms bowls 
and a table of food stretching the length of the dāna-sālā. 
/T_he lay folk are silent and reverent in white. It is formal but 
not... as the brother abbots come in in their own time and 
have a little, then move on. Ajahn Nyanadassano, who had 
been staying at Amaravati for the last few years but who has 
recently been at this monastery, describes how it is this way 
most days, for breakfast and the main meal – times vary, 
marked only by the wooden bell, and it varies too who shows 
up and when. An anumodanā is given at some point. All very 
easy and open – it’s a delight to have a new routine to adapt 
to, to be reminded that there are countless ways of arranging 
food, time, people, comings and goings. 
We stroll down the hill, through the half-worked tea garden, 
past the tiny Hindu temples: ‘Used by Buddhists, bhante, 
when they pray for babies,’ and the humble homes of the 
tea-garden workers, all of whom I’m told are Indian Tamils. 
Thursday the 14th – 
Kandy
Copper Isle.indb   9 05/12/2021   15:45

10
Corrugated iron sheeting, patches of tarpaulin and palm-thatch intermingle, 
lines of yesterday’s laundry colour the eaves and open spaces. /T_he fragrance of 
turpentine – from a local tree, unlike the low /f_lowers of California that smell the 
same – decorates the morning air. Dogs warm up in the sun as Ajahn Vinita and 
Ajahn Nyanadassano oﬀer commentary on the local landscape and customs. 
/T_he T ea Museum is a testimony to the British colonial stamp on the land, on 
the people of Sri Lanka and on the tea-drinkers of the world: James Taylor, an 
enterprising seventeen-year-old Scot was the pioneer who raised the /f_irst successful 
tea crop on this island in 1857. Long-bearded in the pictures, a true towering 
patriarch amid his cowering yet proud workers, and their leaf-gathering baskets.
Muscular machines from the 1880s – crafted in Kendal, Cumbria, and Lincoln 
– stand in the quiet wooden halls of the ex-tea factory. Our well-scripted host, 
clad in Museum uniform sari, spells out the provenance and function of all the 
exhibits, now silent and motionless, stilled in the amber of history. 
Bold moustaches sprawl, draped over the upper lips of the 
players in the 1902 upcountry rugby game, as they do on 
the haughty, jaunty faces of Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s 
hunting party – insignia of another age when ‘white 
man’s burden’ was construed to be a serious and noble 
motivation, the Victorian male was considered to be the 
crown, the ne plus ultra of God’s creation, and the right to 
kill others for sport or political dominance was considered 
to be utterly wholesome and noble. What the bagged 
and the conquered felt about the arrangement was not 
considered signi/f_icant. 
– –
We like our tea, and the growers are proud of their work 
– camellia sinensis has brought much refreshment and joy 
to the world – but with every sip comes a history. /T_here 
is a chain of causes and eﬀects, as with the roads and train 
tracks, the kut·ī that I sit in on this hill: Who dragged 
Copper Isle.indb   10 05/12/2021   15:45

11
the steel out of the iron ore, who carried it here? Who 
broke the rocks? Who hauled and mixed the cement, 
mined the sand? Who dug the ground, chased away 
the leopards and mountain foxes and felled the trees to 
make the space? Who plucked the leaves? 
/T_he faces of the picturesque array of tea pickers, dotted 
across the photographs are written with lines of age 
and care.  /T_hey are glad to get some rupees to feed 
the family, so they work well, but are we told their 
names, their stories? /T_hey are part of us too; they are 
in this cup, their loves and lives and losses. We drink 
this all with every sip so we are wise to appreciate their 
participation in our moments too.
– –
/T_he afternoon is an adventure, via an extravagant 
shortcut, through the hills of the haves, to avoid the 
traﬃc of central Kandy. 
We stroll the avenues of great trees, lingering in the 
space of a 14
th Century royal park, then planted and developed with the aid of 
friends from Kew Gardens in the 19th Century. It’s still called ‘Royal’ even though 
the Queen of England is no longer a monarch here. /T_he ancient woody presences 
tell a patient story; still, live, powerful amid the changing seasons, although one is 
famously not still... the walking tree, a banyan, that strides ever-so-slowly across 
the lawn on out-reaching aerial roots. 
Young couples /f_ill the benches – the gardens arranged like a Bollywood set, 
suitable for romancing – Western tourist groups are guided, sel/f_ie-sticks in hand, 
clad in the whitest possible clothes to meet the heat. 
A ‘royal park’, a collection of named and labelled botanical specimens – what 
do the trees know of their role in the human schemes and namings? Our lives 
intersect, interrelate. We breath each other’s airs. /T_he oxygen they release is now 
Copper Isle.indb   11 05/12/2021   15:45

12
us, our life source; the carbon dioxide we breath out is now 
their bodies. A /f_inal tea is taken at the Sandriana Hotel – the 
Kandy Lake and the T emple of the T ooth glow in the dark far 
below us. 
– –
Copper Isle.indb   12 05/12/2021   15:45

13
We say our farewells to the Springhill community with gifts of vitamins and books 
signed for the abbot brothers, Ven. Ariyagavesi and Ven. Santamanasa, and others. 
/T_he morning roadsides are speckled with groups of people, young and old, waiting 
for their local Lanka Ashok Leyland buses to take them to their workplaces and on 
their journeys.
/T_he forest of Udewatta Kele is an old royal preserve, now a protected park of 257 
acres but with a rare jewel buried in its folds, /T_he Forest Hermitage, last resting 
place of Vens. Nyanatiloka and Nyanaponika, former home of Ven. Bhikkhu 
Bodhi, is a two-and-a-half acre patch of the great forest, and now lodged in two 
buildings – the former British construction, given by the /f_irst Prime Minister of 
Sri Lanka’s family, and the newer vihāra, a stone’s throw away.
We have crawled, in our /f_ine vehicles, for a mile or so into the heart of this forest. 
T urning again and again to edge the hillside and then stopping to heave a liana 
above the pick-up truck and the SUV .  We pass through the gnarled tangles of 
the giant great-grandfather of the forest, a liana complex with a root nearly two 
feet thick that reaches 
over four acres of the 
surrounding area. An 
aged, all-encompassing, 
slowly growing presence, 
like the /T_heravāda of Sri 
Lanka itself. Ajahn Vinita 
had suggested we walk in 
from the forest gate but 
I am glad, on account of 
Friday the 15th – KandyDambulla-Anuradhapura
Copper Isle.indb   13 05/12/2021   15:45

14
the ageing un/f_it legs and the morning heat, that we did not – a mile in and a mile 
out would have been a major undertaking.
/T_he group of resident monks is gathered in front of the house to greet us, hands 
in añjali, warm smiles. /T_he familiar face of Ajahn Dhīravam/periodcentered.titling so is there. He drops 
easily into hosting mode and welcomes us in, alive with chatter. /T_he walls are 
mostly decked with bookshelves, predictably, as this was the heart of the Buddhist 
Publication Society – founded in 1958 – and where Ven. Nyanaponika wrote 
/T_he Heart of Buddhist Meditation and his many other works. /T_he aura of quiet 
focus and presence /f_ills the air. /T_his very spot was where most English /T_heravāda 
literature of the ’50s and ’60s and much of the ’70s emanated from. It is a hive, a 
nucleus, a motherlode. 
We pore over old black and white photographs of the past and passing – whitebearded Venerable Nyanatiloka, posed like Socrates before the front of this house 
in the mid-1950s, shortly before his death during the Sixth Great Council (28
th of 
May 1957); Vens. Nyanamoli, Nyanavira and Nyanaponika – three great leavers 
of legacies, as treasured today as back then; stern faced, a grand group photo at 
Vajirarama, Colombo, where this monastery has its ordinations; Ven. Nyanamoli 
at his desk, over a ring binder 
and some stacks of papers – the 
translator at work... Waves formed 
decades ago break upon the shore 
of consciousness. Gratitude and 
aﬀection, association, fellow-feeling, 
well up within the heart. /T_here 
is a power in the written word, 
containing and conveying truth, 
that is to be cherished and respected. 
When the Buddha said things like, 
‘/T_he miracle of instruction surpasses in value that of psychic power’ (e.g. at D 
11.1-8), he was not speaking poetically or rhetorically. /T_he word has power to 
catalyse the liberation of the heart – an irreversible, categorical awakening – and 
that is a great miracle.
I speak of IB Horner and my family connections, and Bhikkhu Bodhi’s comment 
that, ‘/T_he Horner genome is alive and well’ when he read /T_he Pilgrim Kamanita
Copper Isle.indb   14 05/12/2021   15:45

15
and its copious notes. So it goes – some of us are prone to giving too much 
information.
We are oﬀered a meal at a Tamil restaurant in Kandy before we head north; our 
/f_inal farewells to Kanishka, Ajahn Nyanadassano and Ven. Ariyagavesi are taken 
on the pavement, just beside /T_he Queen’s Hotel. Our party is now boiled down to 
its essence for this pilgrimage: Ajahn Vinita, Ajahn Appamado, Lasal (our trusty 
attendant and driver) and myself. His vehicle is a hi-tech Mercedes SUV , that 
responds politely when one asks, ‘Mercedes...?’ with, ‘How can I help you?’ /T_he 
robot apocalypse draws one day closer.
– –
Words can be trivial, mundane and random in their meaning: Tuk tuks declare 
such as: ‘Sweet are the uses of adversity’, ‘You call it sadness, I call it love’, ‘/T_he /f_irst 
is gold’, ‘Five Sense’, and ‘Bullet-proof, Mission Possible.”
  
/T_he word, and its history in the Southern Buddhist world, 
forms the heart of our next destination. We are heading for 
Āloka Vihāra, just north of Matale, where the tipit· aka pāli
was /f_irst written down. 
Along the way other messages are read from the landscape 
and the roadside: as contrasted with India, no women 
seem to participate in construction crews or road repairs; 
in the Muslim town of Akurana only males are to be seen 
on the street, it’s Friday afternoon, the mosques are letting 
out and only one lone woman – a non-Muslim by her sari 
and the look of her veil – is spotted as we drive through. 
Half the humans are gone, as in some dystopian fantasy or 
like the entwives – alive but somewhere else, in some other 
dimensions, living according to their own dictates, as do 
Amazons and worker bees. 
/T_he treasured presence of great trees, by the roads in town 
and village, as well as in open country, is a message to us 
Copper Isle.indb   15 05/12/2021   15:45

16
too. /T_he great trees, some two yards thick, or more for banyans, are loved and 
lauded and are preserved by all. When roads are to be widened or constructed, the 
great trees must be circumvented, swerved past; as in Ireland, where a motorway 
was required to skirt a fairy thorn bush at Latoon in County Clare. Ajahn Vinita 
recounts how a government minister was forced to resign for having caused a 
great tree to be cut down. /T_his living woody alphabet writes the account of a 
people’s love and respect for the ancient presences, those older and more stable, 
who provide shelter and fruit in season, /f_lowers and coolness in the heat. We are 
touched and blessed by the message, its ancient hermeneutic.
– –
/T_he legends vary but it is said that, in the reign of King Vattagamani, oppressed 
by invasions from South India and an ensuing famine, there was sincere concern 
that the Pali Canon would be lost. /T_his because the monks and nuns who had 
memorized it were dying in large numbers and it had been transmitted only orally 
up to that point. /T_he writing down of it had been avoided, seemingly out of caution 
that the texts would become ‘owned’ by those few who could read and write.
/T_he monks were thus, in circa 73 BCE, ordered by King Vattagamani to write 
down the Pali Canon before it was lost. /T_here are many extraordinary aspects to 
this undertaking, which could be the subject for a book on their own. Here are a 
few observations/speculations:
1) /T_here was a war on so the transcribing had to be done in hiding.
2) /T_here was a famine so the transcribing monks were hungry. In addition the food 
going to feed starving families and children needed to be diverted to the transcribers 
instead – how popular would that have been? How would people have been made 
aware of the necessity when very few could relate to the concept of writing at all?
3) Writing existed – e.g. the Ashokan rock and pillar edicts created some 200 years 
previously in India – but very few Sangha members would have been skilled in it, 
rote-learning being the bread-and-butter of their study. /T_hus, in all probability, 
the majority of the transcribing monks would have had to learn to read and write 
from scratch, literally, to get the job done. 
Copper Isle.indb   16 05/12/2021   15:45

17
4) /T_hey had to agree on the precise words of all the memorized texts they needed 
to transcribe whilst in a war and a state of famine, when mental faculties are not at 
their best. /T_his alone was a huge feat. /T_he three divisions of the tipitaka add up to 
a total (depending on how you calculate word-length) of between 4,005,000 and 
5,850,000 words.
5) All the transcribing would have had to be double- or treble-checked for 
accuracy as many of the transcribers would have been forming letters by copying 
shapes rather than having a well-formed visual alphabet in their memories – their 
relationship to language would have been aural and tonal rather than eye- and 
form-based. /T_he checkers would have had to know the texts 100% perfectly.
6) It was all a ‘message in a bottle’ – no one knew if any of the ola palm-leaves 
would be preserved, or if anyone would survive who could read them. ‘Is this 
eﬀort worth it!?’ might well have been frequently asked. 
7) /T_hey worked day and night (hence the name ‘/T_he Caves of Light’) to get it all 
down before the Dhamma-Vinaya was lost or destroyed.
8) /T_hey knew that their forebears had never written it down so they had to be 
pioneers in this regard. /T_hey had no mentors for this monumental and unique task.
Altogether it was an incredible eﬀort and, without it, this bhikkhu would not be 
sitting here, in Anuradhapura, writing these words in a notebook in 2019. /T_hat 
recension of the word of the Buddha, and the whole of the Southern School of 
Buddha-Dhamma, would almost certainly have been lost to the world and thus 
would have had no presence or eﬀect for the subsequent 2000 years. /T_he world, 
it seems fair to say, would have been a much poorer place as the lives of countless 
people would have never felt the touch of the Pali teachings, only its residues and 
fading resonances from /f_ireside tales and enfabulated evocations, archetypes passed 
on bereft of their origins, like ancient stūpas swallowed by the jungle and turned 
into conical hills, or broken Ashokan pillars transformed into votive lingams, as at 
the Eastern Park monastery in Sāvatthī, or the life of the Buddha transmogri/f_ied 
into the story of Barlaam and Josaphat in the Bible.
– –
t·
Copper Isle.indb   17 05/12/2021   15:45

18
We pause at Dambulla, where the Āloka Vihāra 
monks apparently came from, and climb to the 
cave at the top. Layers of paint, pūjā smoke and 
devotion /f_illed the chambers. Still, silent rūpas in 
the gloom. Lotus blossoms, chequerboards, wrap 
the ceiling while foot-polished stones meet our 
feet, our knees. 
Outside a rock mimics a hill, mimics a rain-
/f_illed cumulus – the rūpas mimic the idea 
of the Buddha, which mimics the quality of 
awakenedness itself. 
White-clad devotees stride by the roadside with /f_lags, /f_lowers, devotion: ‘It’s 
probably for a bodhi-pūjā’ Ajahn Vinita tells us; a bodhi-pūjā – the act of revering 
the quality of bodhi itself; Being Awake, Being Awakenedness, Being Buddha, 
Being Dhamma, Being Sangha.
/T_he mind is not a person; the mind is Dhamma. Its activity is Knowing, its 
manifestation is the gun· adhamma of goodness – the lovely. /T_he pūjā mimics the 
principle as a word, an idea; the idea mimics the reality.
Words when written capture the spirit of a quality and imprison it, crystallize it in 
an alphabet, like a diamond seed or a genie in a bottle, to release the meaning as a 
wish-ful/f_illing sprite or a full-grown precious jewel when the shape meets the eye 
and the eye sends its message to the mind. Alphabets are dream catchers, nets to 
ensnare meaning; the trick is to enable the meaning to stay alive and not end up 
pinned to a cork-board – admirable, labelled but dead.
Words, at their best, are convenient /f_ictions that can awaken the heart to truth for 
‘we are lured into the eternal reality through well-timed illusion,’ and how does 
that luring end? /T_he lured too is revealed to be an unconscious conception and 
only the reality, the Wonderful, remains. Knowing knowing itself.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   18 05/12/2021   15:45

19
 We arrived at the Forest Rock Garden Resort after dark – built on the model of 
an ancient palace with pools and stone pillars, sculptures to match – and settled 
in for a comfortable night. /T_h  e area is hotter than Kandy, despite occasional 
sprinkles of rain. A rainbow arced to our east before nightfall and there were 
clouds and a few drops in the morning.
We are staying about ten miles from ancient Anuradhapura. As we approach the 
environs of the ruins the atmosphere changes palpably – we’re out of the present 
day village zone and into the echoes of the stone-built past.
Broad spreading trees oﬀ  er copious shade over the grassy sward. Families picnic. 
Staﬀ   are oﬀ   work for the election day. /T_h  e place is still and quiet.
We come to the great stūpa of Jetavana; we circumambulate and pay our respects. 
Lasal tells us how his mother came here three years ago on a rainy day. /T_h  e roof of 
the little shrine hall leaked and the place was run down, depressed. She sponsored 
a renovation and a repainting, in a bright and jaunty style, so Lasal and family are 
well known and appreciated here.
A mile or two away is the Abhayagiri stūpa, home and origin of the name we gave 
to the monastery in California. It gives more cause for pause.
In ancient times (it is said) the strictly orthodox /T_h  eravāda Mahāvihāra, of which 
Jetavana is a part, grew into a state of contention with the more eclectic (so they 
say) Abhayagiri Vihāra, founded by the same King Vattagamani (perhaps) who 
had caused the Pali Canon to be written down. 
Saturday the 16th – 
Anuradhapura (presidential 
election day in Sri Lanka)
Copper Isle.indb   19 05/12/2021   15:45

20
I chose the name Abhayagiri for the California monastery to re/f_lect that eclectic 
spirit – the spirit of free enquiry – and because half the land at Abhayagiri in 
California had been given by Ven. Master Hsüan Hua, a Chinese bhikshu, a great 
teacher and mentor of Luang Por Sumedho. In addition, the bhikshuni order in 
China, according to the histories, was launched by the invitation of the Chinese 
Emperor for the King of Tambapanni (Sri Lanka) to send nuns to China to begin 
the women’s order properly there. A group of nuns from a branch of Abhayagiri, 
the Lalita Vihāra, led by the /T_herī Devasārā, set oﬀ in 432 CE and arrived in 
Nanjing, China, ten years after the Chinese pilgrim Fa Hien left Sri Lanka. /T_hey 
held a grand ordination ceremony, for about 300 nuns, and thus the bhikshuni 
community in northern Asia was founded.
/T_he nuns form the largest proportion of the monastic community in modern 
Taiwan, Hong Kong and at the City of T en /T_housand Buddhas, the nearby 
monastery founded by Master Hua, so taking that name also served to make a nod 
of acknowledgement that the bhikshuni order in China had had its roots in Sri 
Lanka; this naming thereby paid respect to another link between our two lineages 
and communities.
We /f_ind a patch of shadow and bow, to sit beside the restored stūpa, with a broad 
Bodhi T ree behind us and the curving wall, inverted bowl of bricks before us.
Locals chant their pūjās nearby; a laywoman pūjārī loudly declaims prayers, 
for good health and well-being of all kinds, for a white-clad woman beside her, 
stopping at every quarter (or sixteenth) of the stūpa’s circumference to repeat 
the appeals ‘Sabba roga...’. Part of the Buddha’s genius was to know and respect 
how superstitions work and to make sure nothing got killed or stolen in order to 
observe them. Für Elise plays on the PA of a bread deliverer’s tuk tuk.
/T_he restoration work over decades has brought this and the other stūpas, tanks, 
kut·īs and vihāras back from their fate as humps in the jungle. A British oﬃcer 
called Mr Harry Charles Purvis Bell was largely responsible for initiating this 
restoration; now it is a perfect bell once more.
However, the life spirit of the jungle never misses a beat and across the curved 
sweep of its rising surfaces, in copious niches and crannies, new plants have 
seeded themselves and sprung up so the fresh-shaved look after the renovation was 
Copper Isle.indb   20 05/12/2021   15:45

21
complete now has the /f_ive o’clock shadow of green growth.
Life relentlessly seeking life. 
Who circled this stu/hyphen.numeratorpa before?
Why did the name Abhayagiri strike such a cord when it was /f_irst seen, in Conze’s 
history – or was it in the Mahāvam· sa? Broken phrases under our soles, fragments 
of inscription, now like the poems of e.e. cummings or Emily Dickinson – brief, 
incised shots of presence.
Did I carve the inscription? Chant on its inauguration? Did I lay /f_lowers for my 
lost child before it? Whose feet pressed on what stones? /T_he same or diﬀerent? 
Does it matter?
We can make a story out of threads of memory and dream, convenient /f_ictions that 
get taken to be realities. Destiny, karma, fate, predisposition, pāramī, un/f_inished 
business, old scars – visible but without an ache…
We can make a story but we can forget how /f_lexible 
it all is. /T_he Oxford Handbook of Contemporary 
Buddhism says that the Jetavana and Abhayagiri 
were partners and that the Jetavana was distinct 
from the Mahāvihāra.
T oday Lasal told us that when he came here as a 
child the stūpa currently named as ‘Jetavana’ was 
then called the ‘Abhayagiri’ stūpa, and vice versa. 
/T_hey swapped designations ten years ago.
So: were the Jetavana and Abhayagiri one unit or 
separate? 
Was this stūpa part of the orthodoxy or the 
opposition? A heresy?
HCP Bell circa 1890
Copper Isle.indb   21 05/12/2021   15:45

22
Who is orthodox?
Who is not?
/T_he mind takes a perception and determines its value – true, good, right, wrong 
– in the town of Akurana ‘goodness’ is preserved by keeping women oﬀ the streets 
on a Friday; in Matale, a woman drives a tuk tuk. We determine right and wrong 
into being and then get lost in our determinations ‘giving rise to all sorts of 
trouble and confusion’ as Luang Por Chah put it.
We have the Precepts as our guiding principles, and the means of developing 
wisdom, wakefulness, is ever present. /T_hat wisdom tells us how the great issue we 
are defending, or attacking, could easily be indistinguishable from its opposite in 
the /f_low of time: Jetavana/Abhayagiri/Mahāvihāra – ink on paper, piles of bricks 
upon the ground, an idea, a story, a word – is it really worth shedding each other’s 
blood for? Is it worth creating entrenched enmity when the years will cause us to 
forget what the /f_ight was for in the /f_irst place?
/T_he meal oﬀering is made by one of the wealthiest families in Sri Lanka. /T_he 
Copper Isle.indb   22 05/12/2021   15:45

23
Gamlaths, owners of Nipuna Rice. /T_hey are sponsoring our stay here at Forest 
Rock and at Polonnaruwa. /T_he daughter of the family, Rangela, caught dengue 
fever and died nearly two years ago. T oday, the sixteenth of November, would have 
been her thirty-sixth birthday.
I spoke of the two arrows, and the dukkha of the Four Noble T ruths as being in 
reference to Arrow #2 only; I mentioned the chronic back-pain of the Buddha and 
his feelings of hollowness when Ven. Sāriputta and Ven. Moggallana had passed 
away.
/T_he exchange is formal, no chats (with me at least) but their attention is keen. 
Nature in death as well as in life is relentless.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   23 05/12/2021   15:45

24
Copper Isle.indb   24 05/12/2021   15:45

25
/T_he temple displays, beside the reclining Buddha shrines, often depict the kings of 
the time – broad moustachioed, sideburns like ramparts, bestride gnarly-browed 
elephants draped in vari-coloured and gilded tackle. /T_hese were the rulers who 
built these stūpas and monasteries, like Dutthagamani of the Ratnamāli (the 
Ruwanweli stūpa), Vattagamani of Abhayagiri, and around them must have been 
a sea, a forest of servants and courtiers. /T_he Suttas describe the /f_ive khandhas as 
being like the perfect servant to such a one but who is secretly an assassin, waiting 
for his (or her) day – the moment to strike (S 22.85). It’s like that. Feelings of 
admiration, attraction, deliciousness, trigger a relishing, a trusting of that faithful 
retainer, apparently doing their innocent duty; and regret too, impatience, 
complaint, the mind can relish these also with equal if not greater ease.
How sweet it is to nurse a pet peeve, to clutch an unforgivable wrong done to 
oneself or another, to vow revenge for honour or justice. But the Buddha pointed 
out: ‘One who relishes the six senses relishes dukkha, I say’ (S 35.19); regardless 
of its object being pleasant, painful or neutral, the relishing itself necessitates 
the result of dukkha. So simple, so penetrative and totally liberating: if it’s of the 
conditioned realm, don’t let the mind grasp; if it has grasped, let go.
– –
Over breakfast at the Forest Rock Garden Resort we muse on the unreliability of 
histories, of the British and Spanish stories of the Armada, the /f_ilm Rashomon by 
Kurasawa, the Buddha’s visits to Sri Lanka, the rewriting of ancestral family trees 
to boost one’s status, and the Oxford University history text book that stated how 
how Ponce de León’s crew were ‘the /f_irst people to set foot upon the American 
Sunday the 17th – 
Anuradhapura
Copper Isle.indb   25 05/12/2021   15:45

26
Copper Isle.indb   26 05/12/2021   15:45

27
mainland...’ forgetting, or more accurately ignoring, the humans who had been resident there 
for 12,000 years or more.
It’s election day’s aftermath. Firecrackers burst from time to time and news trickles in about 
the voting. One person’s glory is another’s disaster – who writes the history? Was it a fair 
result or a /f_ix? What really happened? /T_he Buddha’s wisdom points to the only measure that 
can be trusted, in essence: ‘I teach one thing – dukkha and the ending of dukkha’ (S 22.86).
/T_he parents of Lasal and Randula, Mrs and Dr Haththotuwa have driven up from Colombo, 
Copper Isle.indb   27 05/12/2021   15:45

28
over three hours on the road, to have the opportunity to 
oﬀer us a meal. We meet them at the former Governor’s 
Bungalow, in Anuradhapura. Along the way the roads are 
quiet, shops are still shuttered. Black cormorants perch in 
a crowd on a snaggled tree at the edge of the Tissa Wewa 
Reservoir, built by one of the ancient kings. /T_hey 
sit, black on black, like notes on a stave, waiting to 
be ignited into the music of /f_light and /f_ish-catching. 
White egrets speckle the paddies on the other side 
of the road, pacing the mud of the pools and the 
promising shallows.
/T_he family are joyous in their generosity. /T_hey are 
supposedly retired – their hospital in Colombo 
having been purchased from them – but the loss 
of that has now enabled Mr to take up the role of 
Director General of the Asia and Oceania Federation 
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (AOFOG). /T_hey had 
just returned from a conference in the Philippines which was 
attended by 4000 delegates. Mrs used to be the Managing 
Director of the hospital but now she’s seemingly full time on 
the Dhamma support circuit – they know her everywhere – at 
the Jetavana, at the Ratnamāli, the gates are opened for us 
and we are met with welcoming smiles, in no small part due 
to the vipāka-kamma of the mahā-upāsikā’s generosity.
Was the loss of their hospital a true loss or was it rather 
a gain? A gain of time, or reshaped priorities, of the 
opportunities now opened before them – the truth speaks 
for itself in the language of well-being and through peace in 
the heart. 
– –
By the late afternoon the day has cooled so we set out for 
Anuradhapura for a /f_inal visit to the shrines.
Copper Isle.indb   28 05/12/2021   15:45

29
/T_he roads are now starting to swell with soldiers and well-wishers heading toward 
the Ruwanweli stūpa (aka Ratnamāli) where the new President (Mr Rajapaksa, 
brother of a previous president) will be sworn in on the eighteenth of this month. 
/T_he military presence intensi/f_ies as we get closer but we are waved through at 
every stop, all the way to the processional avenue, /f_lag-lined with the six-coloured 
Buddhist banner designed by Colonel Olcott in 1880.
‘/T_hat was very nice of them... very thoughtful to deck the way for our arrival,’ I 
joked.
‘/T_hat was my mother,’ Lasal responds, perhaps half-joking, perhaps not joking at 
all, given his mother’s unstinting muni/f_icence. 
We are conducted through, to park in a private spot right beside the main 
residence building. Mrs Haththotuwa really has made a lot of friends here. She is 
all smiles as she follows us closely, guiding our way to the Bodhi T ree. /T_his very 
tree is a last surviving limb of the original Bodhi T ree in Bodh Gaya, brought to 
Sri Lanka in 288 BCE in a golden pot by the Arahant San/period.numeratorghamittā, daughter of 
King Asoka, after her brother, the Arahant Mahinda had /f_irst brought the Buddhasāsana, the Buddhist religion, to Tambapanni (/T_he Copper Island) as this country 
was known then. 
/T_hey have arranged for us to have access to the T ree, circled as it is by layers of 
protective walls. An auspicious shower of rain arrives and we shelter for a moment; 
then we are led to the T ree itself. /T_he original is down to one last live, well-worn 
trunk, surprisingly thin, the rest of the original tree here having died away. /T_hat 
said, like the green furze on the Abhayagiri stūpa, new shoots have appeared 
around it and they now stand as full-blown protective presences, far larger than 
the gold-propped limb, reaching out alone.
We pause and bow – Buddha bows to the Buddha, Dhamma bows to the 
Dhamma, Sangha bows to the Sangha. I am invited to touch the tree by our 
hosting monk and thoughts well up of Ven. Sanghamittā, her journey from Sanchi 
(where she resided) to Bodh Gaya, thence by ship to the northernmost point of 
this island. /T_he presence of the T ree evokes the succession of devoted protectors, 
through more than 2000 years, that have kept this spot and this ancient woody 
being remembered and revered by our human family. /T_he monk oﬀers us two 
Copper Isle.indb   29 05/12/2021   15:45

30
leaves to keep. We place them between the pages of a book and move on, another 
faint ripple in the life of the tree passes from its sphere. 
/T_he Ruwanweli stūpa is brightly lit and its approaches are /f_lag-clad and fragrant, 
billows of incense /f_low from the shrines and censers all around. We sit in a corner 
as dusk gathers, hundreds of white-clad devotees recite their chants, oﬀer /f_lowers 
and move around the great domed presence; a golden band circles the white 
belly of it; its pinnacle is wrapped in cloth and scaﬀolding as its renewal is nearly 
complete.
Night comes and we move on, circling the stūpa through a sea of faith. Warm 
stones beneath our feet; snoozing dogs gathered near the devotees – enjoying their 
company, their chanting and its soothing rhythms, and the comfort of the sun’s 
heat, coming back to them to make the night’s rest more easeful.
We plunge further into the dark to pay a last visit to Abhayagiri. It’s quiet here, 
only a couple of families are present, with many sleeping dogs lying in the 
roadway. /T_he latter are very surprised at the arrival of a car and its assaulting 
lights. Some deign to rise and get out of the way and some do not, at rest after the 
hard day of a dog’s life. 
At the stūpa we are quite alone; there is the knowing, the silence and the warm 
darkness. A soft wind brushes through our robes. Murmurs come from villagers 
in the distance; a dog barks but the sound disappears, swallowed by the stars, the 
night and the presence of the Dhamma. 
– –
Copper Isle.indb   30 05/12/2021   15:45

31
Myth and history mingle in our conversations, in the stone and brick, the 
waterways of the land – ‘mythistory’ would perhaps be a better word. James Joyce 
called one of his passages in Finnegans Wake a ‘probapossible prolegomena to 
ideareal history’ – ‘ideareal’ being the operative word. It is an idea, an ideal, it is 
real and all three. Just as with the protagonists of /T_he Story of the Stone, by Cao 
Xueqin (also titled /T_he Dream of the Red Chamber) – one family is called the Zhen 
and the other is the Jia, ‘the true’ and ‘the false’, opposite and yet intermingling.
/T_he myth of the Ramayana is formed around the tale of 
Ravana, the (supposed) demon king of Lanka, abducting 
Sita and then her rescue and return to her husband 
Rama, but what is the Sri Lankan side of the story? Was 
Ravana actually a king of Tambapanni who invaded 
India and captured Sita to avenge the cruel humiliation 
and mutilation of his sister Shurpanakha by Rama 
and his brother Lakshman? And was Rama’s ‘monkey 
army’ an ordinary military force, rather than a host of 
extraordinary animals? /T_he Indian tale smacks of mythic 
defamation, like King Richard the /T_hird’s role in English 
history as told by the T udors who overthrew him – he 
is cast as a twisted evil villain, rather than an eﬀective 
lawmaker and reformer who unfortunately lost a battle to a usurping cousin... 
‘Ideareal history’... 
It is also in play with the tales of A/macron.titlingcariya Buddhaghosa – great hero and 
puri/f_ier of /T_heravāda Buddhism? Or a mole planted by brahmin plotters to 
destroy the Buddhist scriptures and replace them with an impressive dummy 
Monday the 18th – Anuradhapura–
Kaludiya Pokuna–Mihintale
Copper Isle.indb   31 05/12/2021   15:45

32
– the Visuddhimagga. A/macron.titlingcariya Buddhaghosa famously took all the Ancient 
Commentaries, ‘systematized them’ to a coherent compendium, then destroyed 
every copy, so it is said, of the occasionally inconsistent but multifarious Ancient 
Commentaries that had accumulated in the 1000 years since the Buddha’s time. 
He and/or his patrons were book-burners of staggering proportions. 
So... a hero and a puri/f_ier of the T eachings? Or a villain, an assassin of the sāsana, 
planted by an enemy? Lama Tsongkapa revived scholarship and Vinaya in Tibet 
but he didn’t, couldn’t, destroy the Nyingma, Sakya and Kagyu texts of the earlier 
lineages; Martin Luther put the Bible into German but he didn’t, couldn’t, destroy 
the Latin.
Who is to say if it was a rescue or an assassination? What’s the real history?
We muse on the animated /f_ilm Sita Sings the Blues – her story and his story – Nina 
Paley’s experiences, with her partner moving to India, and then her endeavour 
to make Annette Hanshaw’s music of the 1930s part of the resulting animated 
/f_ilm, riﬃng on her personal anguish and feelings of betrayal and its echoes 
in the archetype of Sita and Rama’s travails. Sita and Nina both experienced 
abandonment then, subsequently, Sita gets rejected by Rama after she’s been 
rescued, whilst Nina (along with the dukkha of her partner rejecting her) also 
meets the dukkha of the extensive legal wrangles involved in telling the story as she 
needed to. Nina now has a new career giving talks, such as at TED, on copyright 
challenges, whilst Sita summarily turned her back on the hopeless Rama and 
cheerfully united with the Great Goddess instead.
Is Nina right to advocate for open sources or are the copyright holders right to 
protect their belongings? Who has the right to control Annette Hanshaw’s voice, 
nearly one hundred years later? Who owns? What really belongs? Did Sita do the 
right thing? What is a right thing?
All is /f_luid and probapossible.
– –
Mrs and Dr Haththotuwa bid farewell and we head for nearby Mihintale, the 
place where the Arahant Mahinda and his three monk companions, plus a novice 
Copper Isle.indb   32 05/12/2021   15:45

33
and a layman, landed when they /f_lew in from India. /T_he king of the time – 
Devanampiyatissa – was on a royal hunting expedition and met the group in the 
forest. He became a disciple and invited Ven. Mahinda to stay. In short order a 
sīma boundary was established and sixty-four local men were given upasampadā. 
/T_he caves around Kaludiya Pokuna, ‘Black Water Pond’, were their residences for 
that /f_irst Rains Retreat in Sri Lanka, about 2300 years ago.
After being greeted by Ajahn Vinita’s old friend Ven. Saddhajīva, the abbot, I 
am shown to one of the nearby cave-kut·īs to reside for the day. /T_he raw sloping 
rock forms the ceiling but a wall and a bathroom have been added in more recent 
times, mostly for monkey protection it seems as the local vānara are avid and 
skilled thieves. A bag of sweets and coﬀee was snatched from the back of our 
vehicle less than /f_ive seconds after the hatchdoor was opened. I’m afraid that that 
long-tailed dacoit will be suﬀering from sugar-shock if it eats all the contents of its 
loot in one go.
/T_hat group of sixty-eight bhikkhus spent their /f_irst vassa here and the place has 
been in use since then; according to the history that is so but the serene and bright 
atmosphere con/f_irms it. /T_he paths are swept with care and precision, leaving 
spotless sandy swathes, ready to receive the next falling leaf. When meditating in 
the cave, opening the heart to the place, the generations that have lived here... so 
light! /T_he rock resounds with the presence of the good that has been done here 
over these twenty-three centuries. Karma rebounds, the good and the bad and the 
neutral, and so the heart resonates with those and that which moved and lived and 
worked here, around these hills, over this broad acreage of time.
– –
We met the whole sangha at the mealtime, held in a simple sālā in silence, but 
it is just Ven. Saddhajīva who gives us the tour of the environs, him and an 
accompanying dog that faithfully follows us for the entire circuit.
We climb to the eponymous Black Water Pond, pausing at the old abbot’s stoneframed cave-kut·ī, surrounded by the remnants of those of his four attendant Elder 
bhikkhus – the administrative team of the monastery – in this regard things have 
not changed a lot over the centuries. We walk beneath stone doorways that have 
Copper Isle.indb   33 05/12/2021   15:45

34
lost their associated buildings, at least most of their walls and roofs. A path traces 
the edge of the pond, our barefoot guide’s steps along the way show that, in its 
familiarity, it’s like breathing to him. /T_he far shore of the pond is where the very 
/f_irst sīmā of the islanders was established and it remains a solid presence here. 
Built in the form of the prow of a ship – headed for that Further Shore – the brick 
surround of the central square seems the same size as the /f_irst sīmā at Cittaviveka 
Monastery in West Sussex, laid out by Ven. A/macron.titlingnanda Maitreya in 1981. Perhaps 
he consciously used the same dimensions – I was there when we marked it out in 
oblongs and performed the ceremonies to install it – or perhaps it was coincidence 
– now no one can say.
It is a good /f_it for about thirty monks to sit at forearm’s length from each 
other: two lines of seven down either side and the Elder in the middle, plus the 
candidates for ordination or the reciter of the Rule at the centre. It’s an eerie 
resonance, between the sīmā here, laid out around 300 BCE and the one I gathered 
the stones for, from the ruined wall of the pigsty at Chithurst, in June of 1981; 
same size, same shape, all of us gathered there and here in the same clothing, now 
and 2,300 years ago – echoes, a new-seeded generation, a mirage like all saññā – 
shimmering oscillations from earlier times, across the desert of the real.
Our faithful dog companion dozes on the warm rock of the steps while we sit and 
re/f_lect on the sīmā wall. Monkeys clamber up and down the rocks at the water’s 
edge, as their own ancestors almost certainly did, whilst the /f_irst bhikkhus here 
recited their Rule on the lunar nights. 
/T_he tour takes us to the stone seat, the 
Dhamma-āsana, where the Arahant 
Kālabuddharakkhita expounded on 
the Kālakārāma Sutta, ages after his 
life as the weaselly brahmin pandit 
Saccaka, the ‘Honest John’ of debaters 
confounded by the Buddha in earlier 
times. He’s a famous alumnus here but 
one I’d never heard of before.
We visit the meditation hall’s 
foundation with its vacca-kut·ī still 
Copper Isle.indb   34 05/12/2021   15:45

35
in place outside. Nothing much 
changes there either as the stone 
toilet and urinal would /f_it and 
work for anyone today as well as 
they did for their users when the 
hall was constructed.
Down again to the pristine 
pathways of pale sand, we bid 
farewell and I confess to having 
taken the monastery with me in 
my camera – ones and zeroes, 
pixels, lodged on a memory card, 
to return as dots on a screen, 
sparks of eye-consciousness, 
evoking memory, recollection of events 
and places – all empty as a mirage but formed as well and, like the ‘miracle 
of instruction’, the forms can evoke a change of heart, of attitude, that is an 
irreversible shift of view. A view that is the Dhamma knowing itself.
– –
We pause at Mihintale proper and climb the ancient steps to the top of the rocky 
pinnacle, where Arahant Mahinda is said to have landed when he arrived by 
psychic power from India. Dusk is falling as we ascend. Pale anglo-tourists descend, 
avid local guides in tow, as we rise and /f_ind some more visitors on the top.
An English couple ‘from between Portsmouth and Southampton’ are astonished 
to meet a monk from Kent up here. Sri Lankan families are gathered on the 
sacred summit too and there is much chatter and picture-taking. It’s thus not the 
moment for profound contemplation upon the Arahant Mahinda’s arrival and 
the pivotal events that have resonated down through this land and the world 
on 
account of that. It’s more: ‘I was born in Woolwich…’; ‘I’m from the Weald, born 
in T enterden…’; and ‘Fancy meeting up here... of all places.’ Like the young couple 
I met at Mount Kailash, on their lamp-clad, PA-touting motorbike at ‘/T_he Place 
to Greet the Mountain’, it could be all taken as ‘ruining the moment’ but it is the 
Copper Isle.indb   35 05/12/2021   15:45

36

moment, so the only thing being ruined is an expectation. And whose was that?
/T_h  e mind is not a person – that which knows the person is not a person – or 
perhaps it can be said that that knowing is the essence of what a person does not 
realize that they are. We assume ‘ugly duckling’ without a clue of the swan-like 
reality of Dhamma which is all that was ever truly here. Awareness knows the 
array of personal qualities that come and go but, on account of ignorance, not 
seeing clearly, it mistakes those things like the body and the personality to be me 
and mine: ‘I was expecting… /T_h  is was to be my big experience…’.
Inside is Dhamma, outside is Dhamma, everything is Dhamma. Mind is 
everything, everything is mind.
– –
We pause for a photo-op at the remains of the Mihintale dāna-sālā, the monastic 
refectory. I take pictures both as a memento and to inform the design of the sālā
we are planning at Amaravati. /T_h  e most notable features are that it’s about the size 
we are thinking of BUT it has a massive servery/food-trough of stone, designed 
to keep the rice and curries warm and to be used by several hundred people at a 
serving. /T_h  e stone is six inches thick, thirty yards long and two feet wide. /T_h  us the 
rice would still be hot for the youngest novices when they walked through at the 
end of the line of a few hundred monastics. /T_h  e rice and curries were divided (by 
some lost clever devices, possibly woven palm leaves) so the mahā-trough served to 
eﬃ   ciently contain all the food on oﬀ  er each day. A work of genius. 
– –
Copper Isle.indb   36 05/12/2021   15:45

37
/T_he layers of matter forming the rock settle as the ages /f_low; currents of water and 
wind, sand and sun do their work; the rock forms in striated liquid levels; the /f_low 
of faith and a king’s vanities run through and coax these images from the living 
rock; standing Buddha, sitting Buddha, reclining Buddha – but who is the fourth, 
his knee and hip cocked at that jaunty, easy angle, or are those A/uni02C9nanda’s tears 
running from the eyes, dropping on the crossed arms?
/T_he /f_low of carved robes crosses the rippled colours of the rock, the /f_low of 
kingdoms – from the rise of Polonarawa in the 11
th Century to its fall in the 15th – 
crosses the land, a /f_ive mile stretch of palaces and shops, stūpas and temples, then 
swallowed by the jungle for 600 years, revered only by locals, until some British 
Army oﬃcers started to uncover it; now it is a World Heritage site.
Kings competing, rising, falling, each T emple of the T ooth in their respective 
sacred quadrangles bigger, better and built faster than the one before, the sixtyday one being trumped by the /f_inal eight-day one. Ripples of wind and currents, 
splashes, criss-crossing on a lake of time.
Perceptions /f_low – sitting on the warm rock, before the Parinibbāna rūpa and 
A/macron.titlingnanda, or is it the Relaxed Buddha, or who? Questions /f_low, histories /f_low, 
forests of faith /f_low, gathering and dispersing – open groves of grassy comfort 
under spreading leaves that oﬀer coolth, (with the occasional strangling /f_ig, as 
in Kandy’s Royal Gardens and at Anuradhapura, of course), or forests of piety 
expanded to an eﬄorescing tangle of superstition, of fear of hells, hope for heavens 
and the propitiation of capricious deities.
Stories /f_low – the tale told by Father /T_homas Merton, a T rappist monk, of his
Tuesday the 19th – Polonnaruwa–
Gal Viha/macron.titlingra
Copper Isle.indb   37 05/12/2021   15:45

38
transformative epiphany here shortly before he died mysteriously in Bangkok, at 
an interfaith conference; that other T om, Mr Hancock, the architect who came 
here to trace the Reclining Buddha which he gave to Maechee Rehnu, who carved 
it into glass plates, then sent it to Amaravati where it resides, presides, in the 
Chapel of Rest, in the T emple.
/T_he /f_low of perception and eﬀort; the king has an idea or is proﬀered one; the 
artists are hired; the workers dig and prepare the land; the iron workers fashion 
the chisels, wedges and hammers; the rock is marked with what will go where; the 
/f_irst blow is struck and the images /f_low forth from the stone by a process of ‘that 
which is not the image simply being removed’; day /f_lows into night; electricity 
/f_lows along wires and lights the lamps; ‘warm’ says the rock; ‘soft’ says the light 
of the evening; that light meets the eyes; the forms have their impacts; thoughts 
/f_low; memories /f_low; associations /f_low; ink /f_lows onto paper; every ‘it’ is an event 
– ‘Panta rhei,’ as Heraclitus observed, ‘All is /f_lowing.’
Yet epiphany – the moment of /T_homas Merton, that moment which is not a 
moment in time, that meeting point, that excursion from time to timelessness, 
and even ‘thatness’ – ‘/f_low’ does not apply here, or there… /T_he words strain, 
groan and crack to refer to the reality at least in part but they can never fully 
embody that reality; there are not enough dimensions:
“For, Citta, these are merely names, expressions, turns of speech, designations in 
the world, which the Tathāgata uses without misapprehension; uses to conform to 
common prejudice without clinging to them.”
    D 9.52-3
“/T_hose who live by names and concepts,
Con/f_ident in names and concepts, 
Discerning not the naming process,
Are subject to the realm of Death.
Who labels not, holds no concepts,
Has cut oﬀ lust for name and form.” 
    S 1.1.20
/T_he Dhamma cannot be reckoned, measured in terms of time, place, identity – 
such words do not apply. /T_hat which knows the /f_low is free from /f_lowing.
Copper Isle.indb   38 05/12/2021   15:45

39
– –
/T_he Buddha was unrepresented in human form for centuries until, 
so it is said, King Menander (known as Milinda in Pali) came 
from Greece and Bactria, and caused the /f_irst Buddha images to be 
made in human, albeit Apollonian, form. Prior to this arrival the 
timeless presence/absence, not-a-thing-ness, the non-manifestative 
quality of the Buddha, was rigorously suggested by the empty 
chair, the footprints, the symbol of the T riple Gem, a Bodhi T ree 
leaf, the Dhamma Wheel or a stūpa.
Here, embodied in these ruins, nature has made present those 
same meaningful absences in the east-facing broken rūpa of 
the vatta-sālā (the Round T emple) and the empty plinth at the 
heart of a tall brick-roofed temple, with its Hindu-style exterior; 
standing rūpas are posed on all sides there but at the centre, no 
thing. It is a space the poetics of which ring loudly with the 
roaring silence of the diamond of 
wisdom.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   39 05/12/2021   15:45

40
Copper Isle.indb   40 05/12/2021   15:45

41
/T_h  e early birds that came to the hotel restaurant caught the worms of the buﬀ  et 
breakfast – a couple of coach-loads who arrived last night, plus a big wedding 
party – they have left lone pieces of toast and warmers bereft of everything but 
a label and an aroma of what had been there – more meaningful absences for us 
to contemplate. We accept what’s present gratefully and, before too long, freshly 
prepared reinforcements appear.
/T_h  e wedding party members pose for photos on the lawn – rajinis jewel-draped 
and rajahs with their /f_l  at round headgear, sceptres in hand. Arc-lights, excited 
relatives and chairs are arranged and re-arranged. /T_h  en rain! And it’s all swept 
indoors, the entire stage dressing – dissolved into air, into thin air – the sturdy Sri 
Lankan burghers, the actors disappear too. /T_h  e downpour patterns the surface of 
the lake. Cormorants are unmoved.
Wednesday the 20th– Polonnaruwa–
Kaudulla National Park

the lake. Cormorants are unmoved.
Copper Isle.indb   41 05/12/2021   15:45

42
Worlds intersect and overlap: one hundred Chinese travellers sweep out before 
we’ve /f_inished breakfast, and are gone. Earlier, troops of jogging soldiers thumped 
by on the road below our chalets: ‘Who’s the best!?’ ‘We’re the best!’ they roar. 
Women soldiers form their own running block after the squad of men. Spotless 
white tee-shirts and purpose, intent, evoking the marine exercises of Full Metal 
Jacket. /T_he leader calls and the squaddies respond, as in a church, a temple or an 
ashram anywhere. Worlds intersect and overlap.
/T_he afternoon brings a visit to the elephant world of Kaudulla National Park. I 
have never seen an elephant in the wild before and here are dozens, grazing in a 
small group, one far oﬀ, alone, enjoying solitude or for some 
other cause. Who’s to say?
/T_he parade of jeeps, a parallel herd, brings us to a bigger group, 
at /f_irst wading across the shallows, the spot seemingly chosen 
to allow just enough depth for the calves to walk and breath 
through their upraised trunklets. /T_here are many youngsters in 
the group; our pack of jeeps, camera-toting tourists and drivers 
come quite close. /T_here seems to be a common understanding 
between elephants and people, that as long as the chattering 
bright-clad two-leggeds stay in their noisy moving boxes all will 
be peaceful. Us two-leggeds are not allowed to leave the vehicles so that the two 
worlds are enabled to intersect in peace.
Great beings, so rare and so familiar at the same time. /T_he adults swat the bunches 
of grass to knock oﬀ dirt and bugs, stones. /T_he little ones copy and cluster close 
to their mothers. An adolescent and a baby suckle at the same mother’s milk 
together. ‘I’ve never seen that before!’ Ajahn Vinita exclaims, while a big drip of 
elephant milk slops out of the teen’s mouth as it /f_inishes.
What a quiet delight it is to share the presence of these /f_ine beings. It feels as 
though we humans are the impulsive wild creatures, the exotic reactive exhibits, 
and it is the digni/f_ied pachyderms who are encountering the inmates of the zoo 
with passing interest. /T_hey are more concerned with family and food as they 
saunter along, but they will deign to cast an eye at the creatures caged in their 
wheeled boxes, as they stroll through acres of their park.
Copper Isle.indb   42 05/12/2021   15:45

43

It is a sanctuary for birds as well and there are all sorts gathered, mostly by the 
water – gaily coloured, orange-billed painted storks, herons, egrets. Inland there 
are green bee-eaters perched on mounds watching; many peacocks roam the 
grasses. /T_h  e land is vigorously alive, protected by humans from the humans.
/T_h  e lake is fed by a long canal, dug on the orders of King Mahasena (ruled 277304 CE). We follow it out through the forest where its churning, bowling, rushing 
waters wash the roots of the forest trees, and provide a bath for the local farmers. 
It goes for miles – a feat of extraordinary vision, application and ingenuity. /T_h  ese 
folks were skilled water engineers indeed, our road and passage now following the 
line the king’s designers chose – our lives thus intersecting this way too so that 
now we travel this line, see these waters, just like this.
– –
Our /f_i  nal stop for the day is at the palatial home of the Gamlath family, about 
a mile away from the Deer Park Hotel. Mrs Gamlath greets us, with her son 
Nipuna; Dad is away at Parliament as he’s an MP and the new government is just 
getting settled in.
Copper Isle.indb   43 05/12/2021   15:45

44

A huge pond of koi carp is the /f_i  rst thing we come to in the sitting 
room area. /T_h  e wall behind us opens onto a broad swathe of lawn 
– open for 150 yards until it reaches a stand of trees and then the 
lakeshore. /T_h  e Nipuna Rice company must be doing well but 
the family are humble and unaﬀ  ected in their manner. It is also 
impressive how the death of the daughter from dengue fever, at 
the age of thirty-six, has not been the sole subject of discussion. In 
truth, they do not dwell on that at all and seem to have developed 
a skilful and serene attitude to it. /T_h  e Dhamma is close to their 
hearts and the eﬀ  ects of that have brought many blessings.
We share a few words and oﬀ  er our anumodanā for their generous 
gift of accommodation in this their hotel, Deer Park, and for 
sponsoring our stay at Forest Rock, near Anuradhapura. /T_h  ey in 
turn present us with a palm-leaf book of the Dhammapada, in 
Sinhala and English.
It’s an ancient process we are a part of here; despite being amongst 
the high and mighty of this society, powerful women and men are 
still very human and have loves and losses like everyone else. /T_h  e 
Sangha provides a source of balance and integration when the lurches of success 
and failure, gain and loss, come into the picture. Whether it is a poor person 
at last getting a job with a little money, which we express muditā for, or if it’s a 
mahā-set· t·hi that loses one of their own to a mosquito bite, which brings karun· ā, 
the presence of the Sangha is a focus, a reminder, of how it is all Dhamma-jāti, 
‘born of the Dhamma’ and Dhamma-niyamatā, ‘following the laws of Dhamma’.
A mirror shows us our own face; the Sangha’s blessing is to be a mirror that reveals 
that face to be the face of nature. It is not personal, in essence, this is a shared 
reality, a relational /f_i  eld not an isolated individual. Insofar as we exist (from the 
Latin ex sistere, ‘to cause to stand out’), and thus ‘stand out’ from the reality of 
Dhamma, those waves that each rise up, stand out, are in an intrinsic state of 
relationship with all the waves around them.
/T_h  e waves of China Bay lap onto the beach, a few yards from where this is being 
written. Waves, tides, currents all inter-mingle to create this set of moving, liquid 
shapes. In this moment this ripple is exactly this way, how could it not be aﬀ  ected 
Copper Isle.indb   44 05/12/2021   15:45

45
by, related to, connected with every other ripple around it?
Our lives intersect interpenetrate in organic, intricately interwoven patterns – so 
how could words like ‘individual’ be anything other than convenient /f_ictions: 
‘Merely names, expressions, turns of speech, designations in the world that the 
Tathāgata uses without misapprehension.’
– –
Copper Isle.indb   45 05/12/2021   15:45

Copper Isle.indb   46 05/12/2021   15:45

47
/T_he morning conversations between us three bhikkhus are often rich and 
illuminating. Histories get explored – Ajahn Vinita recounts how it was seeing a 
few seconds of the opening of Kung Fu, with David Carradine, the image of a lone 
hermit striding through the mountains, that wakened the saman· a-saññā in his 
heart as a child. He got the bug.
/T_hen, at seventeen, he spoke with a local abbot who, afraid of Ajahn Vinita’s 
father’s disappointment, de/f_lected the lad’s monastic interests by suggesting that 
he go on a meditation retreat instead. He went, and never returned to the home 
life again. /T_he tale unfolded with various layers of transformation; being given the 
book of Luang Por Chah’s teachings Living Dhamma and needing a friend to help 
him translate the English; that eventually leading him to learn the language in 
order to be able to read the book himself. /T_hen other Ajahn Chah books, then his 
adoption of the /T_hai Forest robe colours, and then to be brought in to translate 
when Luang Por Sumedho came to Sri Lanka to participate in an ordination 
ceremony, thence to England and now here we are.
– –
Other histories are here too – the legend of Tambapanni and how it got its name 
‘Copper Hand Island’. Back in the mists of time the King of Vanga (Bengal) 
married a princess of Kalinga (Orissa). /T_hey had a daughter, Suppadevi, who left 
home ‘to seek an independent life’.
Princess Suppadevi was on a caravan to Magadha when she was attacked and 
abducted by a lion called Sinha – either a real lion or a lion-like bandit, stories and 
Thursday the 21st – Ritigala–
Trincomalee
Copper Isle.indb   47 05/12/2021   15:45

48
interpretations diﬀer.
Suppadevi being kept in a cave by him, they cohabited and produced two 
children, a son, Sinhabahu (‘Lion-armed’) and a daughter named Sinhasivali. 
/T_hese two grew up and escaped with their mother. Later the brother and sister 
married each other. Sinhabahu killed their father, Sinha, along the way and, over 
the years, the two siblings produced thirty-two children. /T_hese children appeared 
in the form of sixteen pairs of twins, with the eldest son being called Vijaya.
Prince Vijaya turned out to be badly behaved as he grew up so he was banished, 
with 700 followers. /T_hey set oﬀ south and, eventually, fetched up on this very 
island; the ship of Vijaya landing at Supparaka. When they set foot on land and 
touched it, their hands and feet became reddened by the local dust, thus ‘Tamba’, 
meaning ‘copper’ to describe the unusual colour.
Vijaya and his group were then attacked by a yakkhinī called Kuveni but he beat 
her in the /f_ight, then, true to family form, married her. She in turn helped Vijaya 
defeat the other yakkhas of the region.
So, in short, the usual mytho-magical pot-pourri of independence, bestiality, 
abduction, imprisonment, escape, incest, banishment, deophilia (or 
anthropophilia, depending on which way one looks at it) and city-founding, 
dynasty-hatching that goes with many ancient cultures.
By way of comparison I wax lyrically (with the help of Wikipedia) on Rome and 
its founders, the twins Romulus and Remus. /T_hey were the children of a Vestal 
Virgin, Rhea Silvia, who had been impregnated by Mars in a grove sacred to the 
God of War. She was the daughter of a former king, Numitor, who had been 
supplanted by his brother Aurelius. Aurelius was afraid the twins (Romulus and 
Remus) might threaten his rule so he had ordered them to be left on the riverbank 
to die. /T_he river god, Tiberinus, took pity on them so a she-wolf was caused to 
adopt them, and cared for them in the cave now known as Luperod... thus arose 
Rome with its name, its empire, its mythopoeic saga.
Other histories: how easily, as children, Ajahn Appamado and I were moved to 
tears – me by Heidi as a black-and-white TV programme, he by Lassie and Bambi. 
Copper Isle.indb   48 05/12/2021   15:45

49
/T_he latter I was not even allowed to see as a youngster, the family knowing how it 
would have rendered me inconsolable for days or weeks, or scarred for life as I was 
by the /f_ilm of the H Rider Haggard story She, at the age of eight, and the dunking 
of sacri/f_icial victims into a pit of lava.
And yet more: the Deer Park Hotel’s marrying couple and the grand, day-long 
process of photos and feasting, costumery and /f_lorals, leads us into the subject of 
marriage and how we three monks contrived to avoid it. Fantasies of ‘the woman 
with golden hair’, the goose-girl revealed as a princess or the brave little tailor – 
‘seven at a blow!’ – who receives the hand of the princess, half the kingdom and 
becomes a prince... then ‘happily ever after’.
/T_hen how the years of discernment revealed or coaxed into being the realization 
that: ‘Between the idea and the reality… falls the shadow’. How the beloved’s 
mother was ogrelike, so what did that imply about how the princess-to-be might 
evolve? How the riders on our fantasies come with /f_lags proclaiming the ecstasy of 
fascination yet bring with them the agony of life on stony ground.
/T_he wedding is one thing but the marriage is another; and to a teenaged mind 
looking around, even at happy marriages, how have the ‘happily-ever-after’ 
possibilities fared in the face of nature’s implacable, unstoppable rolling wheel? 
Not good:
~ In my own childhood domain, apparently, everyone in the local villages loves 
and gets along with everyone – mums and dads, daughters and sons – then a dad, 
even though he is the nicest bloke, is getting thinner, dying of cancer.
~ Or a mum hints at being ready to throw herself in the lake, and (it turns 
out) was not joking.
~ Another dad (approaching sixty) abandons two teenaged daughters to elope 
with a twenty-two-year-old and leaving his sister, ‘the maiden aunt’, to pick up the 
pieces.
~ A sweet lanky daughter gets pregnant at sixteen and then is given £10 by her 
boyfriend as a fare-thee-well, as that’s all the money he’s got: ‘/T_hank you very much.’ 
~ And nobody will ever talk about what Celia got up to…
So, we three all inclined away from matrimony but wedded ourselves to the 
Sangha instead – history is now and Sri Lanka, Tambapanni being discovered by a 
new arrival. 
Copper Isle.indb   49 05/12/2021   15:45

50
– –
Ritigala, the ancient monastery, sits on the 
slopes of a mountain reputed to have been 
brought by Hanuman from the Himalayas 
in order to provide the ailing army of Rama 
and his brother Lakshman with healing herbs 
during the Rama-Ravana War. /T_he trees and 
plants, as well as the rocks and soil here are 
distinct from the land around them. /T_his is 
similar to how Point Reyes and the land to the 
west of T omales Bay, in Northern California, 
compares to the coast of Mexico some 400 
miles to the south but not at all to the land east 
of the San Andreas fault-line. It’s an arrival, 
an intrusion, or extrusion, a remainder or an uplift, like Mount Kailash in the 
Himalayas of Tibet.
/T_he place was /f_irst settled shortly after the arrival of Arahant Mahinda in the 3
rd
Century BCE, and its /f_irst abbot was the nephew of King Devanampiyatissa, 
Mahinda’s patron.
Morning sun paints the stone pathway climbing through the forest, the slopes 
steep and creek-cut like Abhayagiri Monastery in California. Well-shaped /f_lag 
stones, hardly any of them square, /f_it neatly into each other and pave the track 
smoothly underfoot. /T_he steps, however, are all perfectly edged and rectangular, 
this even thirteen centuries after the place was last active as a monastery.
It was the diligent and indefatigable Mr HCP Bell who uncovered these stones 
and caused the excavations that now reveal the fabric and spirit of the place. It is 
a wonder. A well-made path through the forest; circular spots to pause and rest in 
the climb and to be a hub for other paths. Levellish spots are co-opted for group 
residences and a meditation hall, an in/f_irmary complete with a jantāghara, a ‘/f_ireCopper Isle.indb   50 05/12/2021   15:45

51
house’, the monastic sauna used for herbal steam-baths and for easing the aching 
joints of those who sit and meditate and who work to maintain the paths and 
dwellings of the community. It is so like home it is almost eerie. Even the slopes 
and the shapes of the greenery evoke Abhayagiri, or the sparser forest and paths of 
Wat Pah Nanachat. Forest monastic life has not changed very much in 2300 years.
/T_he diﬀerences are the humidity – we are in soaked robes by the end of our 
descent – and the elephants that live here and occasionally wander through. Ajahn 
Vinita tells us how he had tried to get permission to reside in this forest some 
years ago but the oﬃcials were extremely clear – no monks or villagers can stay in 
the bounds of the park!
/T_he guide, Samantha, who is showing us around, however, delights to let us 
know he’s recently been contracted to come back and live here again. He’s plainly 
Copper Isle.indb   51 05/12/2021   15:45

52
gleeful at the idea as he truly loves the place, not only because of its archaeological 
possibilities: ‘Only a fraction has been covered!’ But more because, as he says 
repeatedly, ‘Here you are away from Everything!’ He also tells us how, even for 
those who do come to visit or work here, there is such superstition that everyone 
will be gone by two or three o’clock in the afternoon so that he has the place 
to himself every evening and night. He’s clearly not worried about spooks and 
yakkhas, even though he casually mentions that the mountain was indeed dropped 
here by Hanuman, NOT said to be dropped but actually.
After a meal-stop in Habarana, which was the north/south dividing line in the 
recent civil war, we set oﬀ   for T rincomalee, a port on the east coast, /f_i  fty miles to 
the north-east of Ritigala.
/T_h  e resonances of that war get louder, in our conversations and in the world 
around us. /T_h  ere are more military checkpoints on the road and, indeed, our hosts 
are the Sri Lankan Air Force who have invited us, via Air Marshal Sumangala 
Dias and Rohan Silva (the presidential protection chief), to stay in a lodge on 
China Bay, at their Eagles’ Golf Links. As with the Buddha’s connections to 
King Pasenadi and King Bimbisara there is a mysterious and ancient, as well as 
ironic, relationship between the monastic community and the military. /T_h  ey seek 
for spiritual advice and guidance, and (the logic goes) if you are going to have 
a military force, better for it to have some moral values being encouraged and 
imbued rather than not. /T_h  us we have accepted this invitation to stay here. 
/T_h  e smell of the salt sea and ozone meets us as we step out of the car. Gunboats 
mingle with Tamil /f_i  shing vessels, small and large, that speckle the lagoon. /T_h  e 
war is over but the Sri Lankan military still shows its teeth clearly in this eastern 
area. Sun and blue skies interplay with downpours and thunderstorms, lightning 
ignites the night; then the dawn comes, placid and clear once more; then rain 
again. War and peace, tranquillity and ferocity, Sinhalese and Tamil speakers 
live side by side. It might be an awkward truce but truce it is, to the bene/f_i  t and 
blessing of all.
We might feel that we want a /f_i  ght, that ‘peace’ means being stuck in an oppressed 
state, but war is not the best way to work out our diﬀ  erences. /T_h  e Buddha spent 
much time counselling ways for us to solve our diﬀ  erences without resorting to 
violence. /T_h  e beast within us is looking for a /f_i  ght, a casus belli, as that’s the way it 
Copper Isle.indb   52 05/12/2021   15:45

53

sees that progress is made, achieving its version of the good. Perhaps, if a straight 
/f_i  ght is not advantageous, slyly poisoning the opposition is seen as a way forward. 
We can do better than that; we can meet, talk, listen, allow our hearts to be 
changed, illuminated, enlightened by wisdom and the appreciation of our 
common goals and values. We can do this.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   53 05/12/2021   15:45

Copper Isle.indb   54 05/12/2021   15:45

55
Wing Commander Ananda Kumarasiri, our host, bows to the ground, head fully 
onto our feet, as he bids farewell. We weave our way out of T rincomalee, a city 
loved as a port by the Romans, the Chinese, by Admiral Nelson and others, as 
well as a home and a book setting of Arthur C Clarke who lived here, and his 
namesake, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who placed some 
Sherlock Holmes stories here – it is a treasured spot on 
this Isle of Copper.
We leave the sea behind us, with its schools of tiny silver 
/f_ish that burst the surface of the lagoon – Hopping? 
Running? Chasing? Escaping? Playing? – and we enter 
the rural north. /T_he roads are more bumpy, the villages 
visibly poorer, the money from the south and Colombo, 
the capital, seemingly less forthcoming for this former 
war zone. Sheets of aged corrugated iron form walls and 
roofs and fences everywhere at the roadside as we head 
towards Jaﬀna.
/T_he land is often wide open, with scrubby trees and 
stretches of grass between the road and the seashore, it 
mutates into salt marshes and mangrove swamps, the 
curling roots of the low trees hungrily reaching into the brackish waters. More 
often there are acres, hundreds, thousands of acres of rich green rice, glowing 
with young life in the paddies. Sugar palms, palmyras, line the banks between the 
rectangular /f_ields while white egrets keep their watch below them, always alert to 
movements in the mud, especially where the rice is yet to sprout.
Friday the 22nd – Trincomalee
Copper Isle.indb   55 05/12/2021   15:45

56
T o Ajahn Vinita these Tamil dominated areas are completely diﬀerent to the 
Sinhalese regions he knows so well: ‘Diﬀerent trees, diﬀerent architecture, 
diﬀerent clothes. /T_he girls wear their hair in two plaits here, the ends looped up 
to join their roots...’. T o him these contrasts are vividly apparent, to the untrained 
eye the diﬀerences are indiscernible. /T_he script on the signs is Tamil too and he 
tells us that folks in this area might know Tamil and English but not Sinhala.
He also tells us, ‘I’ve never been in this place before; it’s like a diﬀerent country.’ 
Copper Isle.indb   56 05/12/2021   15:45

57
‘It’s all a diﬀerent country to me,’ I respond, ‘It’s the /f_irst time I’ve seen any of it.’
/T_he disparities that are most striking are the poverty and the sense of scarring. /T_he 
memories of the civil war are strong here. Along the small country roads we travel 
there are signs of war-damage and regular military camps. /T_his region had been the 
main stronghold of the LTTE, (/T_he Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam) more usually 
known just as the Tamil Tigers and, as we stop for a cold drink at a stall on a 
back-country lane, they tell us, ‘/T_his is the last Buddhist village in this area. North 
Copper Isle.indb   57 05/12/2021   15:45

58
of here there are no more.’ /T_here is a stūpa in the village and a white, standing 
Buddha rūpa, so the signs are that now they can live more peaceably here.
It’s a quiet place. /T_here are so many resting dogs along the way that it’s dubbed 
the ‘Dog-in-the-Road’ province. People are at work in their paddies, tending small 
shops and kiosks in the villages; tiny shanties have been popped into place, built 
of a few sticks and a sheet of iron or two. As we rejoin the coast road we pass the 
shrine of Girihandu Seya, at /T_hiriyaya, where (according to the Sri Lankan legends 
at least) Tapussa and Bhallika, the merchants who met and paid respects to the 
Buddha shortly after his enlightenment, and who were given some of his hair as 
a memento, enshrined that hair-relic in a stūpa that has survived here to this day. 
/T_his would predate Arahant Mahinda’s arrival on the island by about 250 years.
/T_he Shwedagon pagoda in Yangon, Myanmar, is said, in a similar fashion, to 
contain some of the same hair-relic, also brought there by Tapussa and Bhallika 
on their mercantile wanderings. Perhaps they divided it and installed some hair 
in each place; perhaps one is the ‘real’ shrine and the other an ‘unreal’, false one; 
or perhaps it was somewhere else altogether... What we know we have is a story, 
a place, the faith of twenty-/f_ive centuries and what is a ‘real’ shrine anyway? Even 
if it turns out that the Wizard of Oz is a fake, somehow his magic can work on us 
anyway, as in the Tibetan story of the dog’s tooth a forgetful son brought back to 
his village when he had promised his mother he’d bring her a tooth of the Buddha. 
/T_he tale tells how she had such faith and devotion that the very substance of the 
dog’s tooth was transformed and began to emit a fragrance of heavenly aromas, 
and to radiate rainbow-coloured light. 
We pass through a village where they recently had to campaign to be allowed to 
cremate the body of the aged Buddhist abbot who had died there. A little further 
on there is more grimness in the air as we reach Mullaitivu. /T_his is where the 
Tamil Tigers’ leader, Prabhakaran, met his end. With his death the war came to 
an abrupt close on May the 19
th, 2009. ‘When he was shown on the television to 
be dead, the war stopped right then,’ Ajahn Vinita tells us. ‘One day war; the next 
day peace, just like that.’
– –
Copper Isle.indb   58 05/12/2021   15:45

59
It was an end, of sorts, but memories and scars linger on. It is unclear exactly what 
was the speci/f_ic cause for armed con/f_lict originally – certainly there was social 
injustice coupled with ignorance, greed, hatred and delusion – but the spark that 
lit up the con/f_lagration was the killing of twelve army personnel in Jaﬀna, then 
putting their bodies on a train to Colombo. /T_his created the casus belli, resulting 
in the burning of the Tamil Library in Jaﬀna in 1981, when nearly 100,000 Tamil 
books and manuscripts, many of them irreplaceable, were destroyed. /T_he war 
erupted and continued for nearly thirty years.
/T_he Sri Lankan government of 2001 had helpfully acknowledged that the 1981 
event had been carried out by ‘goon squads let loose by the then-government’. 
/T_his public statement was supportive of reconciliation and the restoration of 
justice and peace in the area.
Now there is a big roadside shrine at the spot where Prabhakaran was killed and 
an exhausted peace is here. /T_he army and other military bases are very active and 
visible but no signs of protest – no blazoned anti-government graﬃti or suchlike 
– are to be seen. Despite some overseas encouragements to further rebellion and 
violence, and despite any depredations carried out by the Sinhalese or Tamil sides, 
the people here are glad not to be at war anymore and are thus able to get on with 
their lives – their shops, their schooling, their farms and their oﬃces.
On the roofs of buildings we pass, RED CROSS is writ large on the brick tiles; 
the white paint now faded. Broken concrete walls and shells of smashed houses 
are 
weathering, overgrown with rambling vines self-seeded greenery, and are rain-stained 
by the passing years. Old wars disappear into the land – Rama-Ravana in the ancient 
past, the Indian invasions that made King Vattagamini go into hiding, and all his 
successors, wave after wave, now swallowed by the land and water, echoing in lines 
of rock and canals, stone foundations, the names of the /f_ighters and why they fought 
almost forgotten – what was it all for? Do we have a lesson to be learned?
/T_here is the hunt for security, food, resources; the persistence of memory, the 
urges to forgive or for revenge, it is all in the mix. If we learn from the past we can 
avoid repeating the causes of terror and violence, and can bring the wholesome, 
the integrative into being if we want it.
Copper Isle.indb   59 05/12/2021   15:45

60

– –
One of the eﬀ  ects of war is the military presence of the Sri Lankan government in 
Jaﬀ  na. We are here as the guests of that military, in the form of Wing Commander 
Jayarathna Amarasinghe, via Sumangala Dias and Rohan Silva again, and we are 
ensconced in a private nook by the sea – Pebble Beach (despite there being no 
pebbles), Palaly, close to the airport and next door to Prabhakaran’s home village 
of Valvettithurai. An armed guard is on the beach for our protection, just in case, 
as in Svalbard with unpredictable polar bears nearby. It’s a strange mix but so it 
goes; as in the frozen wastes of Svalbard in 2003, we accepted this invitation to 
come to a zone of ampli/f_i  ed uncertainty so this is what comes with it.
/T_h  e sea itself gives the same signal – calm on the surface at the moment but it 
can do anything at any time. Its depths can be holding any kind of dangers to 
people as well as all kinds of treasures; its storms can /f_l  ip a boat with ease and its 
surface can be a liquid support for far and easy travels. Blessings and curses live 
side by side – the /f_i  sh’s death is a shark’s delight and the /f_i  sh’s escape is a shark’s 
frustration. If we learn from this dynamic then that which is beyond blessings and 
curses can be realized.
Warm wind
     Roaring sea
             silence
profound, immeasureable, unfathomable,
like the great ocean
– –
Copper Isle.indb   60 05/12/2021   15:45

61
Jaﬀna bustles. /T_he roads might be bumpy, the older buildings shabby, but there 
are smiles, artless and easy, rows of busy shops, thick waistlines and a /f_lood of 
motorbikes, tuk-tuks, cars and bicycles. /T_he city is well and truly alive, and now 
/f_lourishing even, only ten years after the war ended.
We visit the Jaﬀna Library, the very place that was torched and the 97,000 books 
destroyed; it has a unique place in the history of the con/f_lict, like the Dublin 
Post Oﬃce in the Easter Rising, but it has grown back into full and comfortable 
fertility. It now has 200,000 books, the building is in active use daily and the 
shelves are densely 
packed with Tamil and 
English titles and a 
big variety of others. 
Unlike the library of 
Alexandria, which 
was lost forever, it has 
risen from the ashes 
so completely that, 
apart from a couple 
of photographs of the 
incinerated structure 
set high on the library 
walls, you’d never 
know it had ever been anything but a city library, visited by students at their work 
(as they are this day), and random members of the public looking for something 
to read.
Saturday the 23rd – Jaffna-City Library-Nallur 
Kandaswamy Temple-Sanghamitta Shrine
Copper Isle.indb   61 05/12/2021   15:45

62
At the edge of the military camp where we are staying a large notice beside the 
road proclaims ‘No future without forgiveness’. Wise words indeed. /T_hey could 
be modi/f_ied to explain ‘No future of peace and plenty without forgiveness’ but the 
original is more succinct and carries the meaning.
/T_he British need to request forgiveness for this war as well. Even though the 
‘Indian invasions’ (to use the Sinhalese term) have happened here for millennia, 
the British colonizers deliberately used a policy of ‘divide and rule’ in imposing 
their regime. /T_hey are said to have given a majority of senior administrative 
posts to Tamil-speaking people – promotions they could little hope to be given 
otherwise – so the Sinhalese speakers were an overlooked and slighted majority. 
/T_he Tamils, grateful to the British for their preferments, thus became loyal 
citizens of the Empire. /T_he preferential treatment brought the desired rifts and 
resentments so, when the British relinquished the island as a colony and handed 
over rule in 1948, the Sinhalese majority were keen, so it seems, to redress the 
balance and thus gave the bias of high-pro/f_ile jobs and educational opportunities 
to their own. Kamma and vipāka – action and its results – have a remorseless 
dynamic, thus more of the seeds of the 1981-2009 con/f_lict were sown and bore 
their fruit.
Forgiveness is the art of non-grasping, not de/f_ining others solely by their acts and 
letting go of the past, hopefully having learned from it. It is seeing things in terms 
of Dhamma, nature, rather than in personal, slanted and unclear ways. Revenge is 
sweet but sweetness rots your teeth and brings on many ailments.
– –
/T_here is a little spare time before we can visit the Hindu temple of Nallur 
Kandaswamy Kovil so Wing Commander Amarasinghe takes us to the old 
Portuguese and Dutch forti/f_ications.
‘Why are we here?’ I ask myself at /f_irst, since old castles are not high on my list of 
places I’d like to visit, but soon the vast, pentacular array of walls, guard towers 
and the broad moat – still in remarkably good repair – tells us why. It’s all an 
amazing feat of engineering, originally by the Portuguese in a quadrangular form, 
but then extended and strengthened by the Dutch in 1619 and made /f_ive-sided; 
Copper Isle.indb   62 05/12/2021   15:45

63
completed exactly 400 years ago.
We walk the walls and explore the now roo/f_less armoury, look down into the 
opened prison cells as broken as vacant crab-shells on the beach. Time and eﬀort, 
intent possessiveness brought this all into being, a tool of power and control, now 
we weekenders stroll its ramparts: What was so precious to protect? What can be 
owned and who is there to own it? How long will this body be my fortress? How 
secure is the ownership? It is all spirits:
“/T_he cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,
/T_he solemn temples, the great globe itself
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve;
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuﬀ
As dreams are made on, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep.”
    /T_he T empest, Act IV , Scene i
– –
/T_he Hindu T emple 
is large and wellappointed with a huge 
processional walkway, 
leading past shrines for 
the various members 
of the Vedic pantheon: 
Vishnu, Shiva, Rama 
and Sita, Durga – is 
that her, buried there in 
the dark recesses? – we 
follow a troop of priests and a few devotees, with drums and horns, incense and 
purpose, and make the loop around the vast quadrangle.
Copper Isle.indb   63 05/12/2021   15:45

64
Our guide tells us that it’s big but not one of the four classical Great Hindu 
T emples of the island, and it’s relatively new, having been built in 948 CE. It is 
also notably welcoming to those of other paths so we are received very warmly 
here and, unlike all other male visitors who have to remove their shirts, us 
bhikkhus are allowed to keep our robes on. It’s an open friendship, as far as it’s 
possible to tell, and a sign that there have been kindly and respectful connections 
between the Tamil and Sinhalese peoples over time, as well as the rhythm of 
frictions.
Ajahn Vinita points out the one Buddhist temple in Jaﬀna, as we drive by, and 
mentions that this is where he aims to start from for his planned tudong walk next 
year. It’s a brave undertaking: ‘My family would think I am signing my own death 
warrant, so I am not telling them when I’m going.’ But he is determined, and his 
good heart and humble ways will be better protection than the armed guard we 
have today.
As evening begins to fall we 
head out to the northernmost 
tip of Sri Lanka, to the shrine 
where the Arahant San/periodcentered.titlingghamittā 
landed, with her ten nun 
companions, and brought the Bodhi T ree sapling 
that still grows in Anuradhapura. /T_his spot 
is called Dambakola Patuna, there is a young 
member of the Bodhi T ree family here and a small 
white stūpa set in immaculately tended grounds.
It’s Saturday but we are the only pilgrims here. 
/T_he two men (from the Navy) who look after 
the shrine come over with cool drinks for us and 
Copper Isle.indb   64 05/12/2021   15:45

65
Copper Isle.indb   65 05/12/2021   15:45

66
/f_lower and incense oﬀerings for the tree and the stūpa. It’s a serene 
place, right at the water’s edge, so the wave-surge of the tideless 
equatorial sea /f_ills our ears as we pay our respects and sit for a good 
amount of time.
Appreciation, gratefulness, a warm sense of family arises as night 
arrives and the stūpa becomes illuminated. /T_he heart too – illuminated 
by the great Arahant San/periodcentered.titlingghamittā’s journey, her faith and her bringing 
of the nuns’ community to this land. If she had not come, if Sri 
Lanka had not, 700 years later, had nuns to send to China in 432 CE, 
then the women’s lineage would have never made it to the Northern 
Buddhist world.
How was their sea-voyage? She began inland at Sanchi, now in 
Madhya Pradesh, but went to Bodh Gaya to receive the branch of the 
Bodhi T ree. /T_hence to Patna, ‘Pāt·aliputta’ as it was then, thence to the 
east coast of India and /f_inally to here, the port of Jambu-Kola. T en 
other nuns came with her, to plant the seed of her order here, and we 
even have their names: Uttarā, Hemā, Pasadpālā, Aggimittā, Dasikā, 
Pheggū, Pabbatā, Mattā, Mallā and Dhammadasiyā.
/T_he nuns at Amaravati and our other branches are not bhikkhun· īs, 
like San/periodcentered.titlingghamittā and her companions, but sīladhārā.
In the early 1980s, when our community was newly-formed in the West, Ajahn 
Sumedho realized he needed to establish a form for women’s monastic training 
that paralleled the men’s. /T_he bhikkhun· ī order had faded from the /T_heravāda 
world about 1000 years before (the last historical records of them are in Sri Lanka 
in 1073 CE) and the Eight-Precept maechee form prevalent in /T_hailand was too 
far away in substance from the men’s training; the maechee being able to use 
money, grow food, to cook and to drive. /T_hus, in 1983, the T en Precept Sīladhārā 
form was developed, after much consultation, and the /f_irst four ordinands ‘went 
forth’ in July that year.
/T_here are two forms of lineage for ordination in the Buddhist tradition, as 
aﬃrmed by the great /T_hai scholar monk Venerable Somdhet Payutto: ‘Ordination 
by Dhamma and ordination by Vinaya’. He spoke with /f_ive senior nuns of 
Copper Isle.indb   66 05/12/2021   15:45

67
our community and myself one time in an extended discussion on this point, 
emphasizing that both lines are equally valid and encouraging the style of practice 
and the form of the sīladhārā as suitable for widespread use in /T_hailand.
/T_he nuns of our community might thus not have the ‘Vinaya’ connection with 
Arahant San/periodcentered.titlingghamittā and the line she brought to Sri Lanka, and thence China 
and beyond, but they most certainly have the ‘Dhamma’ connection. /T_here is a 
root relatedness, deep in the ground of Dhamma. It is felt here, by this bright little 
stūpa on the sea-shore, this shrine to the actuality of women’s full enlightenment. 
/T_he Arahant San/periodcentered.titlingghamittā is one of the great matriarchs of this sāsana and we are 
privileged to be here, at the spot where she stepped ashore, where she ful/f_illed her 
aim to bring the nuns’ order to Sri Lanka.
Did she know this would be a life-raft for the nuns? /T_hat 700 years hence a 
delegation would go from here to China at the behest of the Emperor, and 
that that would be a life-line for the women’s order? /T_he branches in India and 
Sri Lanka, in later years, were all seemingly lost to war, famine and religious 
competition. We do not know and the scriptures do not say, but the /f_low of 
history tells us the women’s order /f_lourished in Sri Lanka for about 1300 years 
before they faded here. /T_heir torch continues to burn however, keeping the /f_lame 
of faith alive all around the world today.
Copper Isle.indb   67 05/12/2021   15:45

Copper Isle.indb   68 05/12/2021   15:45

69

We bid our farewells to Jayarathna Amarasinghe and his team in the early 
afternoon. Ajahn Appamado has had a bit of the runs – probably from something 
we ate – and I have lost my appetite too but we are OK to travel so we take to the 
road and head south, making sure to choose a route that brings us onto the long 
bridge and causeway between the reaching prongs of this north end of the island. 
It’s very like Florida around Clearwater and Saint Petersburg – long stretches of 
bright water on both sides of the road, arching bridges, although Florida doesn’t 
have the military posts and roadblocks that pepper the way for us.
Along the road through this northern peninsular we pass close by the other 
great Buddhist shrine of the area. /T_h  is is the Kadurugoda Vihāra – a place where 
the small memorial stūpas of sixty Arahants are gathered. /T_h  e legends of their 
provenance vary, of course. One story tells how, in the 16
th Century CE, the 
Jaﬀ  na peninsula was ruled by a king named Sangili. /T_h  ere were sixty enlightened 
monks, all living in this area. King Sangili was opposed to Buddha-Dhamma 
and thus made life diﬃ   cult for the monastic community in various ways. /T_h  e 
sixty Arahants decided to leave and to go to India. On their way to the coast they 
stayed at Kadurugoda and, as they would daily, accepted alms food from the local 
residents. A poisonous mushroom curry was served to them and all sixty of the 
bhikkhus died. Sixty stūpas were duly constructed to enshrine the relics of those 
monks. A few of the stūpas remain today, a cluster fully-formed in their classical 
dome-shapes.
A diﬀ  erent legend recounts that the sixty Arahant monks died due to a local 
famine, which had beset the area for a long time. Who knows what the true 
history is? Who wrote the records? Who edited them over the centuries? We know 
we hear the stories, of that we can be sure. We don’t have the time to stop and 
Sunday the 24th – KilinochchiDambulla-Diddeniya Monastery
Copper Isle.indb   69 05/12/2021   15:45

70

make a visit so, in this case, the stories are all we have.
– –
/T_h  e long road south – we are struck by the huge war memorial in Kilinochchi, 
where the LTTE had their administrative centre. /T_h  e body of the memorial is a 
bullet lodged in a vast concrete block with a lotus /f_l  ower growing from the cracks. 
We pause for a cold drink in Vavuniya and then pass through Mihintale again.
– –
Along the long road, as we are leaving the former war zone, the conversation turns 
to killing and self-sacri/f_i  ce: /T_h  ere is a memorial, of an armoured car packed with 
explosives, at the entrance to an army camp. Apparently, as the vehicle driven by 
LTTE soldiers burst into the densely populated camp, a single Sinhalese soldier, 
Gamini, climbed onto the top and blew himself and the occupants up before they 
could enter the camp proper. From the Sinhalese side he is therefore a much loved 
and lauded hero. Lasal asks, ‘What was his karma for doing that, good or bad? He 
gave his own life and saved the lives of possibly hundreds of others but he killed 
the LTTE soldiers in the armoured car and he committed suicide himself.’
‘/T_h  e short answer,’ I respond, ‘is “mixed”, both dark and bright. He had a noble 
intention, to save the lives of his fellow soldiers, but he also intended to kill, both 
himself and the bombers, so that inevitably brings negative consequences with it. 
/T_h  is is not a popular perspective in wartime – when the /f_i  ght is on, the opposition 
is being demonized and all of one’s own actions are deemed as good and necessary 
– but the Buddha-Dhamma makes it perfectly clear: a willed act of killing any 
being will bring painful consequences.’
I ask Ajahn Vinita if he has any thoughts on this area, to which he replies, 
‘It’s a very touchy subject! I do my best not to speak about it.’ /T_h  is is very 
understandable and I can sympathize.
Just as in the European myths of the Elysian /f_i  elds, (where the deceased great 
heroes of the Greek con/f_l  icts are held to dwell and enjoy peace) and Valhalla 
Copper Isle.indb   70 05/12/2021   15:45

71

(where Norse warriors slain in battle feast eternally in the halls of the gods) in 
the Buddha’s time such myths were common too. Once a soldier, Yodhājīva (S 
42.3), came to the Buddha and asked him if the story is true that a warrior killed 
in combat will go to ‘the heaven of battle-slain devas’. /T_h  e Buddha, at /f_i  rst says, 
‘Don’t ask me about that,’ knowing he’ll be giving an answer painful to hear. On 
being pressed a third time the Buddha tells Yodhājīva that such a one, a warrior 
killed in battle, will be reborn in hell or as an animal – only those two possibilities 
exist.
/T_h  e Suttas of the Southern tradition are very clear on this principle whereas stories 
from the Northern Buddhist tradition are sometimes blurry. In the Pali, any kind 
of deliberate killing has a negative consequence and can never be justi/f_i  ed in terms 
of Buddha-Dhamma. In the Northern tradition, sometimes in the name of upāya
or ‘skilful means’, a bodhisattva /f_i  gure in an instructive tale will take life to save 
others, as in killing a pirate captain to protect the lives of his captives. /T_h  is has 
been a debate for many centuries and we explore it as the road passes below us 
and the miles unwind – the karma of ‘owning’ pets and ‘putting them to sleep’ i.e. 
killing them, at a certain point of their lives. We also explore the more telling and 
compelling issues of assisted suicide and the killing clinics, such as Dignitas, that 
are legally sanctioned institutions in more and more countries these days.
/T_h  ese are tender issues and not easily resolved, however, the Pali Suttas and our 
monastic rule make it 100% clear: Condoning or carrying out an act of killing, 
especially of a human being, is to be avoided at all costs. If a bhikkhu takes, or 
encourages someone to take, the life of another person, even to the extent of 
causing an abortion, that bhikkhu’s monastic life ends right there, precisely at the 
death of that being.
It is a long conversation and rich in its own way. It is a necessary conversation and 
one that our society needs to pursue in order to clarify our human values, as well 
as the nature of skilful and unskilful, the bright and the dark.
– –
We stop once more to stretch our legs and for a cup of tea in Dambulla, and then 
arrive here at Diddeniya Monastery well after dark.
Copper Isle.indb   71 05/12/2021   15:45

72

/T_h  e abbot greets us warmly and shows us into the newly-built visiting Elders’ 
dwelling. It is surprisingly modern and bright, and thus a contrast to the cavekut·īs they also have, being a monastery that is 2100 years old. /T_h  e sounds of the 
forest are around us and the sky is dark above.
Copper Isle.indb   72 05/12/2021   15:45

73
Ven. Ñān· asīla, the abbot, greets us again in the morning and takes us for a tour of 
Didenniya Monastery – now known as the ‘Ancient /T_heravāda T eaching Institute’. 
It is a pronounced mixture of ancient and modern, that theme repeating itself 
rhythmically as we make our way around.
/T_he building we stayed in was only completed before 
the Rains of 2019. Every /f_ixture is bright and shiny, 
every tile un-chipped, every painted surface unpocked. 
A path through the forest leads us to a similar 
building, a little older but still well-appointed and 
neatly kept. /T_he resident sangha is there to greet us, 
about twenty-/f_ive monks and novices who pay their 
respects and listen attentively while I say a few words 
to encourage.
/T_he forms are ancient as well as the monastery, 
even older, in truth: bowing, making añjali, asking 
for forgiveness, and oﬀering it in return, all in Pali. 
Asking monastic ages, where a monk is from... these 
are time-worn, well-travelled paths of connection and 
communication. I emphasize the need for communal 
harmony and the work it takes to achieve that.
Most of the sangha here are young in the training, the place being speci/f_ically 
a monastic education centre. It is one of about 200 branches of Galduwa 
Monastery, founded by Ven. Kadawedduwe Jinavam/periodcentered.titlingsa and Ven. Mātara Ñān· ārāma 
in 1951 as a Vinaya-based community and also emphasizing meditation. It feels 
Monday the 25th – Didenniya 
Monastery-Kandy-Nuwara Eliya
Copper Isle.indb   73 05/12/2021   15:45

74
like home here too.
We climb the steps and paths through the forest, 
up to more cave-kut·īs and the cave meditation 
hall, and above it the cave shrine room and the 
cave ‘theras’ tea-room’ as well. T races of plasterwork from long-gone previous occupants can 
be spotted on the cave ceiling, reddish swirls 
of decoration almost lost but still present as an 
echo of enduring faith and monastic presence. 
When this place was rediscovered around 
1984, it was a few caves buried in the rugged 
jungle of the hillside. /T_he monk who found the 
place very astutely planted more trees and got 
the Forestry Department (Aranya Rakshana) 
to adopt the area. Astute because the Sangha 
cannot legally reside on property owned by 
the Archeological Department, whereas it can 
on oﬃcial Forestry Department land. So this 
is one of the very few ancient monastery sites, 
like Kaludiya Pokuna, where a living monastic 
community resides, more than 2000 years after 
those in robes like us /f_irst came to dwell here. 
/T_his is an upāya, a skilful means, that seems 
entirely wholesome.
– –
“/T_he road goes ever on and on,
Down from the door where it began...”.
    JRR T olkien, /T_he Hobbit
South-east to Kandy and a meal-stop at the hotel of Udeni Serasinghe’s extended 
family. /T_hey are relatives of Shanthi de Fonseka in England, a regular visitor and 
Copper Isle.indb   74 05/12/2021   15:45

75
supporter of Amaravati. All are grateful for our 
visit to their hotel-cum-art gallery, next door to 
Shanthi and her siblings’ birthplace.
Onwards to Nuwara Eliya: the T ea Kingdom, 
also known as Little England.
Mist wraps the hills in ever-changing patterns 
so it reminds me more of Mendocino County, 
California, in the rains of winter than it does 
of anywhere I know in England. /T_hat said, 
the roadside stalls of local vegetables – bright 
carrots and tomatoes, rhubarb, leeks and 
onions, bulging bags of cabbages, eagerly 
hawked punnets of strawberries – these all do 
indeed bring evocations of the old country and 
the roadside stalls of rural summer.
It’s cooler here and the swirling 
clouds bring a light rain that calls 
out jackets and umbrellas for 
those along the roadside. By the 
time we get into Nuwara Eliya 
town it is down to sixteen degrees 
Centigrade and woollen hats are 
out as well.
/T_he area is a true mountain refuge. 
Before it was ‘discovered’ in 1819 
by a British oﬃcer, John Davy, 
and turned into this vegetable 
and tea-growing capital, it had 
been a shelter for the young King 
Dutthagamani (commonly known 
as Dutugemunu and who reigned 
from 161 to 137 BCE), nurturing 
his army and regrowing their 
Copper Isle.indb   75 05/12/2021   15:45

76
Copper Isle.indb   76 05/12/2021   15:45

77
strength for decades in hiding, before pressing north and retaking territory lost to 
Indian incursions.
/T_he Ratnamāli (Ruwanweli) stūpa was built in Anuradhapura to mark his later 
victory while a slightly smaller one was built here to show where his community 
had sheltered, like the mountain fastness of Shirakawa-go in Japan, whilst he and 
his group were hidden in exile.
/T_he town holds another shrine, but sacred to the Hindu community, as it is 
where, according to a relatively recent Indian archaeological study, Ravana 
kept Sita hidden from the searches of Hanuman and Lakshman in the RamaRavana war. /T_here is a temple, golden and god-clad, beside the road with a pair 
of monkey-deity guardians at the gate. Despite it being a shrine to a story that 
defames the Sri Lankan side of the Rama-Ravana con/f_lict, they are happy for it to 
be here. Indian pilgrims group around the entrance for photos, and a well-stocked 
gift shop and religious artefact emporium sits right across the road. It gets a lot of 
visitors and swells the pockets of the local entrepreneurs as well as the hearts of the 
Hindu devotees so, everybody receives their appropriate blessings.
Less well-known or appreciated is the remnant of ancient cloud forest that /f_ills the 
hillside behind Sita’s shrine. Ajahn Vinita is keen to show us this as it is all that 
remains of the forest that /f_illed the area before the tea arrived with the British. 
Even tree-ferns, like those that are native to New Zealand, abound and /f_lourish 
here.
It is an ancient presence that puts the Buddha-sāsana into perspective. /T_he forests 
were here long before any people arrived, Buddhists or otherwise; their antiquity 
and lore should be respected and preserved with all the energy and goodwill we 
speedy little humans can muster. We are fast and resourceful and can have huge 
eﬀects so it behoves us to consider those eﬀects carefully.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   77 05/12/2021   15:45

78
Copper Isle.indb   78 05/12/2021   15:45

79
/T_he name Little England Cottages, emblazoned 
on the high wrought iron gates almost worthy of 
Buckingham Palace, underscores what region we 
are in, and also announces the selling point of this 
particular compound. It’s a gated community in the 
midst of tea gardens, with lines of English-styled 
mansions side by side. All seem to be the same age so 
it indicates that this is a single entrepreneur’s dream 
project, although the feel of it is more suburban 
Californian than rural English.
It is a roof over the head for one night, as we are 
always encouraged to consider any shelter, and has 
been generously oﬀered for our use by the Gamlath 
family, who own this Kent Cottage as they did the 
Deer Park Hotel. Ajahn Vinita and Ajahn Appamado 
both comment cheerfully at the coincidence of name 
since Kent is the county of England where I was born 
and grew up.
/T_he house is kitted out to be a ‘home-stay’ and I’m up in the well-lit attic. /T_he air 
is cool and refreshing after the sweaty places we have been, so we wrap up in an 
extra layer or two.
– –
Tuesday the 26th – Nuwara Eliya
-Gartmore Tea Estate
Copper Isle.indb   79 05/12/2021   15:45

80

After the misty mountains and washes of grey rain of the day before, our journey 
further south is lit by bright sun and clear skies. /T_h  e land is illuminated as we 
wind and wind and wind our way through the steep hills and bustling market 
towns like Hatton and Maskeliya.
“Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can…”.
   JRR T olkien, /T_h  e Hobbit
Roadside life is as vital and colourful here as it is everywhere in Sri Lanka. /T_h  e tea 
pickers stroll in groups, bags on backs along the rutted lanes and into the lines of 
the adjacent tea gardens. /T_h  eir expressions are easy, cheerful mostly, reconnecting 
with friends at the start of the working day. Many of the pickers are far down 
along the lines already, their hands darting in familiar assertive motions to gather 
the ideal ‘two leaves and one bud’ of each plucking. /T_h  e pickers are all women; 
the men carry well-worn curved knives and small saws, to trim the bushes, cutting 
them back to workable size and tidying the lanes to work in, to clear the paths and 
the drainage as it’s work that demands less nimble /f_i  ngers.
People wait for the ubiquitous battered local buses, chat with their friends; school 
children in their sparkly whites stride and amble their way along. Life happens 
comfortably along these arteries of connection and interaction, they carry and 
embody the prān· a, the lifeforce of the community. People work, pedal slow 
bicycles (less in these mountains), carry their goods and sit to watch. It’s a big 
contrast to the West, in the main, where apart from shopping streets in the cities, 
the roads are where people only drive. It’s even more accentuated in the USA – 
where the police might even stop you to question what you’re up to if you are out 
for a walk. Along country lanes in England the only human or animal life you see 
are a few pheasants and a dog-walker, or a horse and rider once in a while. Here 
the /f_l  ow of life spreads like the giant liana of Udewatta Kele in Kandy, reaching 
unbroken from the home, the village, along these lanes, onto the town streets with 
their open shop fronts and myriad stalls. /T_h  e warmer climate supports this open 
air engagement, but it’s more a spirit of communion and presence that is its most 
striking quality, as well as the colours of life that it brings.
Purples and pinks shimmer in the clothes and /f_l  owers, bright oranges in the tree 
Copper Isle.indb   80 05/12/2021   15:45

81

blossoms and the shop-fronts, yellow and mauve houses, pale blue and lime green 
walls of shops, sheets of emerald foliage dripping down a high retaining wall, 
everyone’s laundry – draped on bushes, corrugated iron fences, from lines, over 
hedges – scarlet and puce, white and golden, turquoise and black... Whether 
Buddhist or Hindu, Christian or Muslim, everyone seems to rejoice in the many 
colours of the universe here, it crosses barriers although styles of clothing and 
architecture might vary.
A Hindu T emple will be covered in statues of deities and protectors, and will be 
painted red and gold, but the modest Anglican church will be a spiﬀ  y pale blue 
with smart white trim as well. /T_h  ere is a rejoicing in what light and form can do 
with the human eye.
We roll along through the valleys and over 
small passes. Sri Pada (or Adam’s Peak, 
depending on whose name you use) comes 
into view, where the Buddha (or Adam 
or Muhammad or some other entity) was 
reputed to have landed and left a giant 
footprint, to mark it as a place of reverence. 
Green forests reach to the peaks in this 
tropical zone. We are high up, around 
5000 feet, but a pelt of trees clads every 
non-vertical surface in view – trees and the 
omnipresent tea gardens.
Before the British arrived and developed the area it was almost entirely wild 
rugged forest. King Dutthagamani had successfully hidden here, as had Ravana 
with Sita before him, but there were no villages, towns or ancient monasteries in 
the region, not even at the foot of Sri Pada. It was truly a wilderness – the domain 
of animals and birds, /f_i  shes in the running streams, and the billions of insects, 
snakes and crawling creatures that make up the forest world. A countless variety of 
plants and trees, mushrooms and epiphytes, vines and /f_l  owering bushes once lived 
here before camellia sinensis arrived or the idea of ‘tea’ was ever formed.
/T_h  e eye and mind takes it all in as the view changes, ever shifting this way and 
that. One moment struck by a colourful blossom, then, letting go:
Copper Isle.indb   81 05/12/2021   15:46

82
“/T_he eye views forms outside
but inside there is nothing.
/T_he ear hears dusty sounds
but the mind does not know.”
   Master Hsüan Hua 
Seeing, hearing, feeling, thinking... mind objects, sight objects... that which 
knows them is not an object, has no form, is anidassana, ‘non-manifestative’, 
invisible, has no location. Or rather ‘location’ does not apply. /T_hat which knows 
the world is not of the world. /T_hat which knows the person is not a person.
  – –
We reach Gartmore T ea Estate in time for the meal oﬀering. It is the last tea 
garden, of some 550 acres, at the end of the valley. It is surrounded on three sides 
by mountains and the waterfalls at the valley’s end are the source of Sri Lanka’s 
longest river, the Mahaweli, which reaches the sea at T rincomalee.
Our friend Kanishka, who met us at the airport, is here to greet but our hosts are 
Sandamali and Lakshman Hettiarachchi. /T_he place was acquired by their family in 
1948, from its Scottish owners, when the British handed over the government of 
the island to its own people.
/T_heir greetings are warm and sincere. /T_hey are delighted and honoured to host 
us here; they welcome us in and oﬀer a lavish meal, all served on classical English 
crockery, with English cutlery and the insignia of Forties and Fifties England all 
around us. A 1929 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (A-Anno) tops the 
bookshelves. Volumes such as Eyeless in Gaza, /T_he Street of the Sandalmakers, and 
the likes of Five on Finniston Farm and Five on a Secret Trail, by Enid Blyton 
are gathered here too, echoing the well-worn hardbacks of the schoolchildren’s 
classics What Katy Did and /T_he Naughtiest Girl on the shelves at Kent Cottage in 
Nuwara Eliya.
/T_he light switches are all dark brown bakelite and the electric wires to the lamp 
Copper Isle.indb   82 05/12/2021   15:46

83
over the table are the type of twisted, cord-covered cables 
that I last saw in Kent in the 1960s. In our rooms the 
furniture, and the door handles and window latches, are 
similarly out of the far past. I feel like I’m back in School 
House Farm of the 1950s or at Home/f_ield or Farthing 
Green Farm, my family homes in the ’60s. It is a time 
capsule that has lasted into the autumn of Sandamali and 
Lakshman’s lives.
Sandamali tells us how she and her siblings and cousins 
would all come here as children – each with a diﬀerent 
section of the bungalow – and how fond the memories are, 
how cherished the place is but how they now fear, owing to 
falling tea sales, the estate might need to be sold.
Gartmore currently employs 500 people, almost all being 
Tamil families who have worked here for generations, so 
there are deep fears of what might be lost if the estate leaves 
their family. ‘But everything goes, eventually’ I remark, ‘and the Buddha-Dhamma 
helps us with exactly this.’ Without trying to be too preachy, I underscore how 
none of us are ever really in control but that: ‘We have islands of opportunity 
where we can generate real blessings, and make a diﬀerence, so it’s up to us to use 
those opportunities when we can but, when they are gone, we do not view that as 
a loss but rather just nature taking its course.’
– –
When we go to take the tour 
of the Gartmore tea factory, 
Kanishka is surprised to /f_ind 
that one of his nephews is the 
manager here. /T_he nephew 
walks us through the lengthy, 
multipartite process that goes 
to make a cup of tea. And we 
oﬀer a blessing for the factory. 
Copper Isle.indb   83 05/12/2021   15:46

84
It is still doing OK but, as Sandamali tells us, their tea has fallen in quality and 
popularity today, hence the dropping income. 
/T_he greatest glory of Gartmore was the tea 
auction of 1896 in Mincing Lane, in the 
City of London, when their tea was sold 
at twenty-/f_ive pounds and ten shillings 
(£25/10/-) a pound – a small fortune in those 
days – and we are proudly shown a photo of 
that occasion; an excited crowd of top-hatted, 
moustachioed gentlemen gathered at the 
auctioneer’s podium, caught in the decisive 
moment of that peak.
– –
We end the day with a short but precarious 
drive to see the waterfalls, and ‘the famous 
black hole’ of the river, of which it is said 
that the pool has no measurable bottom. 
Sandamali also points out her favourite 
swimming hole, just up from the bridge, 
where they like to swim and cool oﬀ on hot summer days.
Her husband, Lakshman, is with us but, like the ageing eﬀects of the market on 
the Gartmore Estate, the years have had their impact on his usual ‘dashing about, 
looking after everything’, as Sandamali tells us. He has Parkinson’s disease now 
and, just the day before, he had taken a tumble and had needed several stitches in 
his face.
‘Old age and sickness have no manners,’ Luang Por Chah once said, ‘they 
just arrive and push the door in without asking.’ /T_his is the way of nature – 
implacable, remorseless, productive and destructive of all life.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   84 05/12/2021   15:46

85
We bid our farewells in the sitting room, with its Max/f_ield Parrish 
prints on the walls, its yellowing, mellowing books and its view 
out to Sri Pada. It’s a poignant departure, even after our brief 
stay. /T_here are various pieces of advice I oﬀer: ‘Adapting to new 
times, thinking broadly, if they chose to sell water rather than tea 
“Gartmore Falls Water” could be a catchy name’ – ‘Outside the 
box!’ Sandamali helpfully adds in – but it seems they have already 
tried all sorts of approaches and have been made oﬀers along the 
way. However, she tells us, the repeated stumbling block is getting 
all twenty-six partners to agree. I point out how: ‘Sometimes a 
person ends up defending an opinion that they don’t even feel 
very strongly about but they hang onto it because they don’t want 
to be seen to back down.’ 
‘It’s their ego,’ agrees Sandamali.
‘Exactly! So then you need to work out ways to focus on the practical issues while 
people’s ego-needs are also attended to…’.
‘Not easy.’
‘No, not at all easy but often that’s the only way forward,’ I reply, ‘then, if 
someone is determined to get their own way and ruin things for everybody – let 
them do it. Everyone loses – so be it. Life is too short to focus on such things so 
sometimes it’s better just to let go.’ /T_his said with the caveat that I never make 
anyone’s decisions for them but that I’m happy to oﬀer perspectives to help 
individuals decide for themselves.
Wednesday the 27th – Gartmore 
Estate-Balangoda-EmbilipitiyaKataragama
Copper Isle.indb   85 05/12/2021   15:46

86

‘/T_h  at’s what we’ve done,’ she tells us, as it seems 
that she and Lakshman have spent the last /f_i  ve 
years following all the approaches I just spoke 
about. So... let go, none of it really belonged in 
the /f_i  rst place.
– –
It’s another bright morning, the tea rows gleam 
emerald in the early light, the datura /f_l  owers 
glowing rose and yellow with the sun shining 
through their hanging blossoms.
/T_h  e Camellia Deva reigns supreme here. One 
hundred and /f_i  fty years ago this might all have 
been cloud forest but camellia sinensis wraps 
every curve of hill and valley for miles and miles 
and miles as we head south.
It is only when we rise over the pass to 
Balangoda, following and slowly overtaking the 
ardent members of an Adventure Bike T ours 
cycling group, that we leave the universe of tea, 
at least temporarily. /T_h  ere is a forest reserve that begins at the ridge and spreads in 
a huge sweep down the hill. We sympathetically anticipate the upcoming joy of 
the cyclists as the downhill run extends unbroken, through dozens if not hundreds 
of curves, for ten or /f_i  fteen miles into the valley. Eventually the forest ends, a few 
small villages begin and rows of tea once more clad the lower slopes beside us.
We pause at a small roadside eatery, Shriyani’s Restaurant, which consists of two 
or three tables and a glorious view over the valley. As time had been tight, to meet 
our noon limit for eating, Ajahn Vinita had deftly researched the food possibilities 
along our route, found Shriyani’s on Google, and had requested by phone that 
they have the food ready for when we arrived. It was a /f_i  nely tuned operation and 
she did us all proud; not only was the abundant food all waiting for us but we 
were oﬀ  ered it as dāna by Shriyani and her small team. ‘/T_h  ey said they don’t often 
Copper Isle.indb   86 05/12/2021   15:46

87

get the opportunity to oﬀ  er a meal to monks so they have donated it.’
We are as grateful as they are, to meet with their kindness and generosity. /T_h  e fact 
that they are in a roadside shed and we are travelling in a new Mercedes SUV is 
totally irrelevant to the dynamic. /T_h  ey wish to oﬀ  er and we are blessed to receive – 
everyone is grateful for the encounter.
Down from the hills the roads begin to smooth out – we are heading for 
Embilipitiya. On the way we pass through Balangoda, the birth place and home 
monastery of Ven. A/macron.titlingnanda Maitreya, a distinguished Elder, born in 1896, who 
had been a signi/f_i  cant and helpful mentor to Luang Por Sumedho in the 1980s. 
He spoke some fourteen languages, including Pali, had been the San· gha Nāyaka
of the Amarapura Nikāya in Sri Lanka and had established the sīmā boundary for 
ordinations at Cittaviveka Monastery in June, 1981.
With Ven. Ajahn Chah’s health collapsing in that same year, during the Rains 
Retreat, Ven. A/macron.titlingnanda Maitreya’s 
friendship, and extraordinarily 
knowledgeable guidance, was of 
immense bene/f_i  t to the /f_l  edgling 
monastic community of Amaravati. 
When the place had opened, in 
1985, he and Luang Por Paññānanda 
were the presiding Elders over the 
ceremonies and he had oﬀ  ered much 
genuine and practical assistance for 
many years.
In 1986 he came and spent the Rains 
at Amaravati, with two assistants 
– Venerables A/macron.titlingnandamurti and 
A/macron.titlingnandaman/periodcentered.titlinggala – he had his ninetieth 
birthday there and it was his seventieth 
Rains Retreat; in fact the Rains of all 
the other resident bhikkhus present 
that year added together did not 
add up to seventy. Even Luang Por 
Copper Isle.indb   87 05/12/2021   15:46

88
Sumedho had only nineteen Rains when the Retreat began. Ven. A/macron.titlingnanda Maitreya 
gave us Pali classes – he regularly stayed up into the wee hours composing his 
book Pali Made Easy in order to better instruct us – with these lessons being 
keenly attended. He also endeavoured to teach us Abhidhamma, which had been 
met with less enthusiasm.
– –
Embilipitiya is currently the banana capital of Sri Lanka and it is also famous for 
being the home, and housing the grave, of King Kavantissa (ruled 205-161 BCE). 
He had been the father of King Dutthagamani, whose story we had encountered 
before on this journey, who drove out the Indian forces and who built the 
Ratnamāli (Ruwanweli) stūpa at Anuradhapura.
It is also where Ajahn Vinita grew up and where today most of his family resides: 
his mother now lives in a nearby temple but his father, his brother, sister-in-law 
and their four children are all in the family house on Hospital Road.
Naturally we make a stop here. /T_h  ey are all present to greet us and, as we are 
ushered into the main room, we see the smiling picture of Ajahn Vinita in pride of 
place on the wall, even above his parents’ wedding picture and his father’s portrait. 
He is plainly loved and respected here and all the family, from dad on down to the 
youngest, kneel to pay their respects sincerely to him and to all of us.
With his parents standing right before us he recounts how his father was bitterly 
opposed to him going into robes – even saying to him he’d forbid him to come to 
his funeral if he had robes on. It was his mother who, in a decisive move, hustled 
him one day into the Land Oﬃ   ce jeep and drove him to the three-week Mahāsi 
meditation retreat that he never returned from. /T_h  at was twenty-/f_i  ve years ago 
now, when Ajahn Vinita had been a mere seventeen.
We re/f_l  ect on King Suddhodana’s resistance to his son’s Going Forth, even when his 
boy had become the Buddha, and on the blessings that come when our personal 
concerns do not de/f_i  ne the day. I also share a little of my own story, of Going Forth 
at twenty-one and of my own parents’ misgivings. It’s an old story, older probably 
than written words, and a thread that runs though most human societies; the child 
Copper Isle.indb   88 05/12/2021   15:46

89

that loves and respects their parents but sees that, as per the old poem:
“Your children are not your children.
/T_h  ey are sons and daughters of Life’s longing for itself.”
   Kahlil Gibran, On Children
After cold drinks and /f_i  ne tea we are on our way again, now on eerily straight 
‘ghost highways’ built with Chinese money to little purpose other than to lead to 
a ‘ghost airport’ that almost no one uses. For a time we are the sole vehicle on this 
vast construction of tarmac, concrete and overpasses, street lights and signs that 
warn of peacocks. It’s a spooky feeling.
Soon the road downgrades a little and we join other vehicles and the usual, 
companionable fellow road-lovers, sleeping and roaming dogs and an occasional 
herd of buﬀ  alo.
After the hi-tech miracle of being able to track a slowly de/f_l  ating tyre through 
the luminous dashboard of our car, we receive rescuing-angelic assistance in 
Kataragama at Ruwan’s Tyre Shop, along the way meeting up with Indika, an old 
friend of Ajahn Vinita. He leads us into a wilderness camp, on the edges of Yala 
National Park, where we plan to stay for a couple of days. Indika’s friend and 
business partner in this Ceylon Wild Safaris camp, Arran, greets us and gets us 
settled in. /T_h  e rain has ceased and the crickets are well underway for their night of 
activity, merging with the inner sound of silence.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   89 05/12/2021   15:46

Copper Isle.indb   90 05/12/2021   15:46

91
Glamping in Yala. /T_he raucous clamour of the dawn chorus easily passes through 
the cloth walls and insect screens of the dwellings here. T echnically these are 
‘tents’ (for the purposes of staying within the laws of accommodation so close to 
the National Park), but the hot and cold running water, the air-conditioning, the 
plumbed-in shower and toilet, not to mention the jacuzzi on the veranda, all belie 
this concept. It gives a very /f_ive-star tone to the 
concept of ‘camping on safari’ but none of us 
are complaining.
In contrast to the luxurious individual rooms, 
the gathering places – the ‘lounge’ and the 
‘dining room’ – are far more traditional forest 
forms. /T_he roofs are grass and the sides are all 
open to the air. /T_hey are genuine sālās, even 
with a tarantula in the rafters of the dining 
area. We are in the scrubby wilderness around 
the edges of the park proper and Arran, our 
main guide, tells us repeatedly how dry and 
barren this all was a mere six weeks ago. /T_his 
is hard to credit as it’s currently a sea of green 
after all the recent and now present rain. It 
poured in the night and has been chucking it 
down intermittently during this day.
Our route to Section Five of the 378 square miles of Yala National Park takes 
us through the town of Kataragama. /T_he name is very familiar as it is often 
mentioned (usually with a blush or an apology by the Buddhist community) as 
Thursday the 28th – Yala National 
Park-Kataragama
Copper Isle.indb   91 05/12/2021   15:46

92
a place Sri Lankan people go to receive blessings for a new vehicle, to help pass 
exams, to launch a business, get a fortune told or suchlike. Even devout and 
dedicated Buddhists will go to the ancient devala here to hedge their bets a little 
out of the weight of custom, if not superstition.
Arran recounts his well-researched version of the origins of the shrine and how it 
has become (or perhaps always was) a place of blessings for people of all religious 
backgrounds: Buddhist, Hindu, Muslim and Christian.
We go back to King Kavantissa again. He had been a devout Buddhist and 
therefore a conciliator. He had retreated from the Hindu King Ellalan, of the 
North, and was in the refuge of this southern region, the country of Ruhuna. His 
eldest son Dutthagamani had disagreed with his paci/f_ist policies and had thus 
been banished, going to what is now the town of Kotmale in the region of Nuwara 
Eliya that we had visited a few days before. Dutthagamani hid out there and then, 
when his father had died and his younger brother, Saddhatissa, had assumed the 
throne, he came out of hiding and took the crown of Ruhuna for himself.
King Dutthagamani was unsure as to whether he had suﬃcient forces and 
personal power to conquer King Ellalan so he went to the Gem River and 
spoke out, appealing to: ‘Any deity that could help!’ /T_he god Skanda, brother of 
Ganesha and another son of Lord Shiva, the war-deity, had responded and said he 
would help Dutthagamani to conquer the north. /T_he king promised to pay the 
god his dues if he won.
/T_he war went well. Ellalan was defeated, Anuradhapura was restored as the capital 
and Dutthagamani united all three countries of the island into a single kingdom, 
which he now ruled. /T_hus grateful to the powerful deity Skanda, and to ful/f_il his 
vow to create a suitable shrine in Skanda’s name if the war was won, he went back 
to the Ruhuna region and spoke once more to the god. Dutthagamani took a bow 
and arrow and Skanda said to the king that he should build a temple to him at the 
place where the arrow landed. /T_he shot carried to the place where the Kataragama 
T emple now sits, as it has done for more than 2000 years.
/T_he king then built the temple and when it was /f_inished he made a public 
declaration that it was this god of the Hindu pantheon who had enabled him 
to win the /f_ight and who should thus be revered alongside the Buddha and 
Photo by Indika Nettigama
Copper Isle.indb   92 05/12/2021   15:46

93
his teachings. /T_his led to the establishment of the long, mutually supportive 
relationship between the Buddhist and the Vedic cultures on this island and to the 
custom of keeping a devala shrine in most monasteries here, where local deities 
and spirits can be propitiated.
Arran’s account leads me to comment how myth and story are what carry meaning 
through time and that this myth creates a standard and an encouragement for 
cooperation between the religions. It also illustrates how religion works like an 
ecosystem, that various elements need to work in collaboration with each other for 
the bene/f_it and functionality of the whole.
I give the example of the Buddhist scriptural tale of how the brahma god 
Sahampati, (Br/periodcentered.titlingihaspati or Brahman· aspati in Vedic myth is Lord of Prayer and 
Creator of the Word) who, discerning that the newly enlightened Buddha was 
disinclined to teach – since the task would be ‘wearying and troublesome’ given 
the depth of delusion and addiction to becoming apparent in the human world – 
appeared before him and entreated him to teach since there were some beings: ‘… 
with only a little dust in their eyes.’
/T_he Buddha had responded to this by looking around the world and seeing that, 
indeed, the deity was correct. He thus began to spread the Dhamma teachings 
that we have in the world today. So the Buddha needed that prompt from an 
outsider – a brahma god – in order to ful/f_il his potential as a teacher, just as 
Dutthagamani had needed the blessing of Skanda to win the victory over Ellalan.
I underscore the point by telling the story of the Buddha’s enlightenment 
and how he needed to invite the Earth Goddess Dharan· ī to be his witness in 
order for Māra’s armies to be dispelled. Māra had been defeated but would not 
acknowledge it, protesting that all his 700,000 followers would testify to his 
right to rulership of the universe. He attested to the newly-enlightened Buddha: 
‘You are just a lone monk with an in/f_lated sense of your own importance. Who 
do you have to support your claim to so-called enlightenment, out here like you 
are, languishing in the woods?’ /T_he Buddha touched the earth and called the 
Earth Goddess Dharan· ī to witness. She rose up, declared the Buddha’s right to 
supremacy amongst all beings and Māra’s army was washed away by a /f_lood that 
she unleashed from her unbound hair.
Copper Isle.indb   93 05/12/2021   15:46

94
Arran is surprised to hear that there are gods and demons in the Buddhist 
tradition too – he had thought it was only a process of awakening one’s own 
mind – but I assured him that, even though the principal work of a Buddhist 
was indeed to liberate their own heart and mind, the scriptures and the world 
they describe abound with entities in diﬀerent dimensions. Just as he is adept 
at naming and categorizing the many birds, animals, insects and plants of this 
region, I point out how there is a parallel taxonomy of entities and dimensions of 
being that he could learn about. Since Ajahn Punnadhammo recently published a 
book on exactly this subject – /T_he Buddhist Cosmos – I oﬀer to send him a link to 
the text.
/T_he old Land Cruiser (‘Old body, new parts’ assures Indika) serves us well as we 
weave and churn through the muddy lanes and deep puddles of our route through 
the forest. We see herds of spotted deer, wild water buﬀalo, many bright coloured 
birds and broad-winged eagles – the white bellied /f_ish eagle and the hawk eagle 
amongst them. It’s a rich ecosystem, with termite mounds tall and healthy, and 
many dead trees left to stand as perches for the bird-life and also the myriad living 
systems that a ‘dead’ tree supports.
After an hour or so Indika gets a message that a leopard has been seen today and 
we take a quick left to follow the path that will take us to be near it. We had seen 
an elephant on the road who was so well-known that Arran told us it even had a 
nickname, but the leopard sighting creates an extra level of excitement.
/T_he call has gone out to the small group of safari-goers in Section Five today. 
/T_here are only six or seven jeeps in this area and all of us have hurried to the spot. 
We are waved to a halt after Indika slowly eases the Land Cruiser as close as we 
can go.
And there she is, in the bushes not /f_ifteen 
yards from the road, lying on her front, 
watching us half-interestedly. In a few 
minutes she rises and we see a patch of 
bare skin on her back: ‘It is probably a 
wound from the hoof of a sambar or a 
water buﬀalo.’ She moves a little further 
into the bush and lies down again, a more 
Copper Isle.indb   94 05/12/2021   15:46

95
comfortable distance from the 
eager eyes and cameras of us 
who are so keen to pry into 
her life.
Arran’s camera has a long 
lens but that of Indika is a 
bazooka. On the screen of it, 
as he focuses in, you can see 
the individual hairs of her 
fur, the shades of gold and 
dark brown in her spots. /T_he 
subtle twitching of her ear as 
she scans for activity nearby 
is displayed in minute detail. 
Every movement raises a 
chorus of gasps in the vehicles 
round us but, wanting to 
leave her alone and to get 
out of the way generally, the 
vehicles start to move on.
‘/T_hat’s the /f_irst wild leopard 
I’ve ever seen,’ Ajahn Vinita 
tells us, which warms the 
hearts of our guides even more. /T_hey are delighted to have been able to give us 
this unique opportunity.
– –
Light is falling and so is more rain as we ease our way onward through the park. 
Indika’s sharp eyes spot an orange-headed thrush, a serpent eagle, a /f_ish-eating 
owl – many birds along the way, even though he’s driving and has to watch for the 
weirdnesses of the potholed and puddled road at every twist and turn.
Rain washes us in a warm balm, since we have no windows, the forest darkening 
Photo by Indika Nettigama
Copper Isle.indb   95 05/12/2021   15:46

96
around us. After a few more turns we emerge onto 
a rocky shoulder and, there above us upon a rise, is 
a stūpa built in the time of King Mahasena in the 

th Century BCE, the time of the Buddha. /T_here 
had been a vast city here; now it’s mostly under the 
jungle. Countless fortunes have come and gone; 
empires have risen and fallen since then.
Mahasena was 400 years before Dutthagamani. 
In more recent years the LTTE had tried to claim 
this area too as it had been, at one point, a Tamil 
stronghold. /T_hey had endeavoured to bomb and 
sabotage the dam that occupies a large area of this 
forest, so this part of the park had been closed for 
many of the war years. Now it’s invaded daily by 
the safari travellers. In Section One there are up to 
700 people a day; here in Section Five they tell us 
it’s quieter, only a maximum of eighty or ninety.
Invasions, enthusiasms, empires and fashions come and go. Right now the likes 
of Indika and Arran, and the friends of Ceylon Wild Safaris, are hard at work to 
protect the rich life of this biosphere and others similar around Sri Lanka. /T_hey 
truly love the wild and have educated both themselves and others as to how to 
best help it all to /f_lourish. It’s a long and hard task but doable.
/T_hey plough what part of their pro/f_its that they can into acquiring more land to 
protect it and to keep the wildlife corridors open. /T_he forest of Yala is huge but 
if its animals are in a hermetically sealed space, ultimately the gene pool and the 
food and water sources will all suﬀer. It needs to breathe. /T_hese good people have 
thus made it their mission to acquire as much of these marginal wilderness lands 
as possible, to keep the corridors open and to allow the /f_low of life to happen 
freely. Systems rise and fall, but with careful tending, well-being can be sustained 
and progressed, and those islands of opportunity can broaden into mainlands, at 
least for a while.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   96 05/12/2021   15:46

97
Out of Yala and Kataragama we soon reach Tissamaharama to its south-west. /T_he 
town is famous as one of the places the Buddha reputedly visited in Sri Lanka. It 
is also famous as a sanctuary for 30,000 monks and lay people /f_leeing the wars in 
the north, and as the buﬀalo curd capital of the country – the products of which 
industry we had enjoyed the day before.
Its most famous feature is the huge white ‘bubbleshaped’ stūpa which is reputed to have once housed 
the front of the Buddha’s skull; reports diﬀer as to 
whether that sacred relic is still contained within it 
today. Histories diﬀer, as usual, and other locations 
now claim the honour of housing that ancient 
treasure.
We arrive by the back gate to make a brief stop only. 
Ajahn Vinita knows the way as he has spent several 
days here on his wanderings in the past. It is a vast 
presence. Its age and fragility are embodied in the 
ancient form – reminiscent of the great stūpa at Sanchi 
and the oldest stūpas of the Ashokan period – as well 
as in the steel cables that encircle it, holding the bowl’s 
shape in place against the vagaries of weather, gravity 
and time.
It is a living shrine, however, with clear paths around 
it, bright /f_lags /f_lapping gaily and with a host of 
swallows darting in swoops and curls, attending 
Friday the 29th – Yala-TissamaharamaKamburupitiya-Akuressa-Colombo
Copper Isle.indb   97 05/12/2021   15:46

98
apsaras dancing in celebration of the T riple Gem’s glory.
We bow and move on, heading for Hambantota, on the road to the southern tip 
of the island at Matara. /T_he landscape is radically diﬀerent in this region – it is 
/f_lat here in the sea’s margins, and the rice /f_ields beside the road are laid out almost 
like English meadows. /T_here are hedgerows of shrubs and low trees bordering each 
/f_ield but, even though some of these resemble ashes and oaks in pro/f_ile, the palms 
and occasional clutches of bananas bring the sharp reminder that we are not in 
Hertfordshire or Kent.
We pass close by the hermitage of Bundala, where the late British bhikkhu 
Nyanavira lived. /T_he hermitage is oﬀ to the south of the road in the unfarmed 
scrublands and lagoons of the coast. All this area was swamped by seething 
waves during the tsunami of 2004 and several thousands of local people and 
tourists died in that tragedy. /T_he /f_ields took some years to recover from the salty 
inundation but they seem very healthy now. Similarly, the buildings beside the 
road and in the few towns and villages look to be in good shape, it having been 
/f_ifteen years since the great /f_lood.
We /f_ind ourselves on another ghost highway, huge and well-built but with few 
people and their vehicles on it. /T_here are water buﬀalo and dogs but sparse 
wheeled traﬃc: ‘/T_hey built this highway here because there are so few people in 
this region. /T_hey should build one around Kandy but they don’t!’ Ajahn Vinita 
explains, ‘Because people complain and want so much compensation, they don’t 
build a big road where they really need one. Instead they put it here, where there 
is no one to use it.’ It is a weird but familiar human logic.
A little further on we see tall cranes and gantries oﬀ to the south against the 
skyline. ‘Is that a ghost port?’ I ask.
‘/T_hat is actually a working place… well… almost,’ Ajahn Vinita goes on to say, 
‘they are developing it here – /T_he Port of Hambantota – but there are not many 
people living nearby. You have to give it a chance, though... with the port there it 
will hopefully lead to more activity and engagement.’ It’s a positive outlook, and 
he compares it to my own encouragement for the need to rebuild Amaravati; you 
need to seed the ideas and get the momentum going and hopefully things come 
together as people see the bene/f_its. Whether or not that will happen here is hard 
Copper Isle.indb   98 05/12/2021   15:46

99
to say. /T_he port was built with a lot of Chinese money, as was the highway, and 
that foreign government sustains control of a lot of what happens here. It is not a 
local industry.
We stop for the meal – at the insistence of Lasal’s father – at the Hambantota 
Shangri La Golf Resort. It’s newly built, only three years old, and is also strangely 
isolated out here in the barrens, beside the sea. /T_he clientèle is also 40% Chinese, 
the other portions being 40% Sri Lankan and 20% everybody else.
We have a warm reception by the staﬀ, who were expecting us, and at the 
restaurant there is another surprise – the under-sous-chef is Mano Ruwan, who 
had been at school with Ajahn Vinita. /T_hey are all smiles and hugs, not having 
met for a number of years, and mutually surprised and delighted at this chance 
meeting here.
Our day’s plan had been to stop at any random roadside eatery. But in the /f_low of 
numerous phonecalls, Lasal’s father had told him he was a regular visitor to the golf 
resort and that he was friends with the staﬀ and owners. So, under a little duress, 
we pulled in only to /f_ind this old acquaintance of Ajahn Vinita as our cook.
As an aside Ajahn Vinita tells us, in a quiet tone and a few times, that: ‘He was a 
bully. He beat me up a few times and his brother was worse.’ People do change 
however, as time goes by, and it seems that Mano is genuinely excited and inspired 
to see him and the rest of us. We also hear that he has avoided getting married so 
far and that, in the longer term, he’s looking at monastic life as the way for him. 
He’s a strong, big, bright, communicative fellow so, if he does follow the monastic 
path, it seems unlikely that he would remain hidden away in the woods for long 
but who knows?
/T_he subject of bright lights and old friends brings to mind Venerable Nyanamoli 
– former confrère of Venerable Nyanavira in the British army, and later fellow 
bhikkhus together here in Sri Lanka – who was also a bright light but of a very 
diﬀerent type. Energetic and creative, he spent his ten years as a bhikkhu (before 
his early death from heart failure) at the Forest Hermitage in Kandy. His light 
shone out in the form of his published works but he in person was squirreled away 
under the vines and spreading canopy of the Udewatta Kele forest. His brother 
monk, Bhikkhu Nyanavira, not such a proli/f_ic translator and writer, had lived an 
Copper Isle.indb   99 05/12/2021   15:46

100
even more quiet and secluded life, devoting his time largely to solitary meditation, 
here in his hermitage on the south coast at Bundala. Even though both of them 
lived such eremitic lives, it is notable how both of them have continued to bring 
their in/f_luence to bear over the broader world, so many decades on.
– –
We cut inland and pass through the Kamburupitiya area. Lush green walls of palm 
and creeper, tall trees and jungle /f_lowers line the road as we wend our way through 
the moist and glistening lanes. Small steep hills, neat paddies and cinnamon 
groves are all about us. It is the latter’s prime environment and, we are told, 90% 
of the world’s ‘real’ cinnamon is grown here.
Ajahn Vinita spent much of his childhood right here at the home of his father’s 
parents, his grandfather being: ‘/T_he kindest, gentlest, sweetest man you ever met,’ 
while his grandmother was: ‘Really tough! Everyone was afraid of her!’ He tells of 
his years here as the best times of his childhood: ‘No one would tell me what to 
do. It was great.’
Short heavy showers fall on us as we make our way, this being the norm for the 
southern inland part of the country. Broad leaves of roadside plants drip; purple 
trumpets of local bindweed blare out of the tangles, heedless of the downpour, 
seeming to relish the refreshment.
A few miles on we come to Akuressa, where Lasal’s family has many plots of land, 
bearing tea, rubber, cinnamon and agar-wood trees. I had never heard of the 
last of these before but apparently agar-wood is the most expensive ingredient of 
perfume in the world. Ajahn Vinita tells us, ‘It’s more expensive than cocaine... 
more than 1000 Rupees for a gram. People will come and cut the trees to poach 
them they are so valuable.’
Costs of perfume aside, this is a rich land bursting with fertility and the eruptive 
surges of living growth. You can almost feel it humming with the prān· a of 
teeming vitality.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   100 05/12/2021   15:46

101
Lasal’s parents are here to meet us and to give us a tour of the land that their 
daughter, Dr Randula, wishes to oﬀ  er as the possible site of a monastery. It is 
a twenty acre plot of the estate and one of the local plantation managers takes 
us along the muddy tracks of the hillside to have a close-up look. /T_h  ere are tea 
and rubber and cinnamon trees on the land, as well as big boulders and any 
amount of water. He tells us you can dig anywhere to make a well. It is steep, like 
Abhayagiri in California, but that is also what provides many nooks and crannies 
to potentially place secluded kut·īs.
Randula oﬀ  ered this to Ajahn Vinita for his consideration if he wanted to start 
a place up in Sri Lanka. He is not asking to do this, nor is he hungering for the 
land (like we all were hungering for the presence of the leopard the day before 
in a somewhat unseemly or at least un-bhikkhu-like way) but he is open to the 
possibility in a tentative way: ‘If there was a senior monk who came along who 
could look after it...’. I point out that, at fourteen Rains, he is a senior monk, at 
least more senior than Ajahn Sumedho was when he took over the Hampstead 
Vihāra. He had only ten Rains when he arrived in London in May of 1977 but 
Ajahn Vinita seems unconvinced by this argument.
Starting a new monastery is a big undertaking, but it can happen in gentle 
increments. I point out that Randula could have a bit of the ground cleared and 
then establish a single kut·ī. With a small grass-roofed sālā for, say, twenty people 
to sit in, and a well to bathe at, a resident bhikkhu would have all they needed 
for a stay of a few weeks or months at a time. It would be a small investment by 
Randula and the family, with no commitment on either side to begin with, and 
then it could be seen as to whether it was a going concern or not.
As bhikkhus we are encouraged to live like bees, taking only what is freely oﬀ  ered 
by a /f_l  ower and in the amount that is needed today – not to lay up a store or to be 
manoeuvring and /f_i  nagling to get speci/f_i  c outcomes.
“Just as a bee gathers nectar and moves on
without harming a /f_l  ower,
its colour, or its fragrance,
just so should a wise one pass through each village.”
     Dhp 49
Copper Isle.indb   101 05/12/2021   15:46

102
We live on what is oﬀered, carry the pollen of goodwill as an easy burden, and 
are ready to go or not, to do or not do, to build or not, as each situation suggests 
and allows.
We will see what the future brings. I’m almost sure that Mrs and Dr Haththotuwa 
will have sent pictures to Randula already and will have informed her of the 
details of our visit. /T_he seed is planted and we will see how it develops, or not, in 
the rich soil of faith and energy in their noble family.
– –
We had planned to stop for a night at the T undola Forest Monastery but rain 
descends upon us with supra-biblical force as we roll along the Colombo highway. 
It’s a roaring inundation, pounding on the car roof and the tarmac so intensely we 
sometimes seem to be driving in a river. We all begin to have the same thoughts 
– knowing that our arrival in T undola would have meant a climb by the waterfall 
and an oﬀ-road tuk tuk ride up into the forest, we decide to change plans and to 
head straight to Colombo instead. Later, the T undola monks called to thank us 
for not coming, as the place had indeed been /f_looded and it would have been very 
troublesome to try and receive us.
Luckily the place pegged out for Ajahn Appamado to stay 
in, before his planned journey on to India, was available 
a day early so here we are, up on the /f_ifteenth /f_loor of an 
apartment complex close to the Parliament buildings. 
Below us a waterway winds through a block of forest green. 
Beyond that, an array of countless houses, outrigger boats, 
riverside shacks, shops and oﬃces, the purple bud of the 
new communications tower, and the rising heights of the 
tallest building in Sri Lanka, are spread in full hazy chaotic 
urban splendour. Our last day lies ahead.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   102 05/12/2021   15:46

103
Kushan, the owner, and his little daughter helped us get settled when we arrived 
and, with Lasal, brought a table-bending breakfast for the three of us bhikkhus in 
the morning.
It’s an easeful day in the white world of the apartment block of Clearpoint 
Residencies. /T_he Haththotuwas and Kushan’s 
family come around after the meal and we 
oﬀer our blessings for them all.
/T_he afternoon brings rain again, wafting 
sheets of grey that hide most of the city below 
us and before us. /T_he /f_inal packing done 
we launch into the great outdoors and head 
for the central part of the city: Colombo 7. 
/T_his area houses numerous embassies, the Sri 
Saturday the 30th – Colombo
Copper Isle.indb   103 05/12/2021   15:46

104
Lanka Cricket Club, government oﬃces of 
various ministries, the Gymkhana Club and 
Vajirarama Monastery, the place where we are 
heading.
Established in 1901 as a centre for the 
focused study of Dhamma and meditation, 
it /f_lourishes today as a well-reputed beacon 
of skilful Buddhist practice. It was the place 
where Venerables Nyanatiloka, Nyanaponika, 
Nyanamoli and Nyanavira all received 
upasampadā so it has a long history of 
involvement in the evolution of the Western 
Sangha.
/T_he current abbot, Ven. /T_hirikunāmale 
Ānanda Mahānāyaka /T_hera, is well-known 
to Ajahn Vinita and, along with Kanishka 
who is a regular supporter here, he oﬀers us a 
respectful and sincerely warm welcome.
/T_he most senior monk present sits next to me 
and they ask me to oﬀer a short teaching for 
the assembled bhikkhus and novices. I talk 
of the many facets of the pilgrimage we have made and how the piece of advice 
that the Buddha gave in the ‘Lesser Discourse on the Destruction of Craving’ (M 
37) was applicable in all situations: ‘Sabbe dhammā nālam· abhinivesāya – nothing 
whatsoever should be clung to.’ /T_his applies to all kinds of situations and all kinds 
of grasping: at sense pleasure, at views, at conventions, at feelings of selfhood. And 
when the clinging stops, there is peace.
– –
T o my surprise they present me with a jewelled stupa, covered with diamond- and 
pearl-like stones, and which has a small plaque to mark it as an oﬀering given on 
the occasion of this visit. It is a touching gift and a true honour to be bestowed on 
Copper Isle.indb   104 05/12/2021   15:46

105
me by such an esteemed spiritual place of training as this.
We visit the library and are shown more /f_iles of the letters and pictures of their 
notable Western alumni. /T_here are letters in their own hands of Venerables 
Nyanatiloka, Nyanaponika and Nyanamoli, with copies of newspaper clippings, 
journal entries and translations, group photos from the 1930s and even earlier – 
these are, like the albums in the Forest Hermitage in Kandy, a true treasure chest 
of Dhamma history. I leaf through the letters of Ven. Nyanamoli and comment 
how I once met a man who had been at Oxford University with him; how he 
had had no formal schooling prior to arriving at Exeter College and how he had 
/f_inished a triple major degree in two years: ‘He told me that “Bertie” could turn 
his hand to anything, whether it be learning topiary from a gardener at a wealthy 
friend’s country house over a weekend, or how he had taught himself T urkish in 
six weeks in order to fully enjoy a holiday there.’
– –
Ven. Nyanasiha, who received upasampadā at the age of eighty and has written /f_ive 
books since then, introduces himself and we chat over tea.
Ven. Nyanapola, who had lived at the Island Hermitage with Vens. Nyanamoli 
and Nyanavira, comes round to my room to chat as well. He too is in his late 80s 
and is warm and genial in our exchanges.
Photo opportunities at the entrance precede the /f_inal car-ride and now it’s two 
o’clock in the morning at Colombo Airport. /T_he ink of this pen is about gone as 
is my time on Tambapanni – /T_he Copper Isle.
Luang Por Sumedho once said, ‘Time is an illusion caused by ignorance.’
/T_he images change but the knowing element – vijjā-dhātu – is free of that. May 
these miles of moving images fully serve their potential to help actualize the 
realization of this quality.
– –
Copper Isle.indb   105 05/12/2021   15:46

106
Copper Isle.indb   106 05/12/2021   15:46

107
Copper Isle.indb   107 05/12/2021   15:46

Copper Isle.indb   108 05/12/2021   15:46

109
Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery   
A forest monastery in Northern California, founded by the author in 
1996, with Ajahn Pasanno.
Abhayagiri Vihāra  
A monastery in Sri Lanka, with a large stūpa, that was founded by King 
Vattagamani in about 80 BCE.
Ajahn (/T_hai)  
T eacher; from the Pali ācariya: in the Amaravati community, a bhikkhu 
or sīladharā who has completed ten Rains Retreats (vassa).
alms bowl  
/T_he bowl used by Buddhist monks and nuns in which they receive the 
food which is oﬀered as alms by the lay community each day. An essential 
item to be owned by every Buddhist monastic.
Amarapura Nikāya  
One of the lineages of the Buddhist monastic community based in 
Sri Lanka. It was founded in 1800 and was named after the city of 
Amarapura in Mynamar. /T_he other main lineages in Sri Lanka are the 
Siam Nikāya (founded in 1753) and the Ramañña Nikāya (founded in 
1864).
Anidassana  
Non-manifestative; invisible; unformed.
añjali   
A gesture of respect, made by placing the palms of the hands together 
and raised to the heart, or the forehead.
anumodanā    
Literally: ‘I rejoice in the good that has been done’; a blessing.
apsara   
A celestial dancer; the female counterparts of the gandhabbas (Skt. 
gandharvas), the celestial musicians, who are customarily male. /T_hey are 
beings that are denizens of the ‘Heaven of the Four Great Kings’. Both 
apsaras and gandhabbas are regularly featured in temple murals and basreliefs in Buddhist countries.
atammayatā  
Literally: ‘not made of that’; a quality of insightful vision that involves 
not imputing solidity or independence in the perceptual process. It is 
a subjectless and objectless awareness; it is somewhat akin as a concept 
to the ‘non-duality’ of the Vedic and Upanishadic practice of Advaita 
Vedanta.
bhante  
‘Venerable sir’; a polite way for a lay person to address any Buddhist 
monk; also the polite way a junior monk addresses a senior. /T_he 
equivalent form of address for nuns is ‘ayye’.
Copper Isle Miles ~ Glossary
(Unless otherwise stated, non-English words are from the Pali language)
Copper Isle.indb   109 05/12/2021   15:46

110
bhikkhu (Pali)/bhiks·u (Skt.)  
A fully ordained Buddhist monk.  
bhikkhun·ī (Pali)/bhiks·un·ī (Skt.)  
A fully ordained Buddhist nun.
Bodhi   
Enlightenment.
Bodhi-pūjā  
A formal ceremony honouring the realization of Enlightenment.
Bodhisatta (Pali)/Bodhisattva (Skt.)   
Literally: ‘A being who is intent on Buddhahood’; one who has made the 
vow to realize ‘Unsurpassed Full and Complete Enlightenment’ in this or 
a future life. /T_he Pali ‘Bodhisatta’ most often refers to the previous lives, 
or the early part of the last life of the Buddha Gotama – the Buddha of 
this current age. 
Bodhi Tree  
/T_he tree, in Bodh Gaya, India, under which the Buddha was sitting when 
he realized enlightenment; a /f_icus religiosa. Also other trees of the same 
species, growing in diﬀerent places.
Buddha-sāsana  
/T_he Buddha’s dispensation; the Buddhist religion.
camellia sinensis (Latin)
/T_he tea plant.
casus belli (Latin)  
Literally: ‘a cause for war’; an excuse used by rulers or governments 
to enable them to attack other countries and claim some would-be 
reasonable justi/f_ication.
dacoit (Hindi/English)
A member of a class of robbers in India who usually carry out their 
banditry in armed groups. 
dāna   
Literally: ‘generosity’; often used as a term meaning ‘oﬀerings made to 
a monastery’ or, more speci/f_ically, the alms food oﬀered each day to 
Buddhist monastics.
dāna-sālā  
/T_he hall in a monastery where food oﬀerings are made and the 
communal meal is taken by Buddhist monastics.  
deva   
A heavenly being, an angel; a being that abides in any one of the seven 
lower heavens in classical Buddhist cosmology.
devala  
A shrine, usually in a Buddhist monastery but also sometimes 
independently, set up for the worship and propitiation of devas. /T_hese 
devas often being considered to be protective spirits of a particular 
locality or capable bestowing certain gifts.
Dhamma
/T_he teaching of the Buddha as contained in the scriptures, not dogmatic 
in character, but more like a raft or vehicle to convey the disciple to 
deliverance; also the truth and reality toward which that teaching points; 
that which is beyond words, concepts, or intellectual understanding.
Dhamma-āsana  
A special seat from which a Dhamma talk is given.
Dhamma-jāti    
Literally: ‘born of the Dhamma’; natural; an aspect of reality.
Copper Isle.indb   110 05/12/2021   15:46

111
Dhamma-niyamatā  
Literally: ‘functioning according to the laws of Dhamma’; the orderliness 
of the Dhamma; the laws of nature.
Dhamma-Vinaya  
Literally: ‘the teaching and discipline’; the Buddha’s own term for his 
dispensation; the ‘Vinaya’ being, speci/f_ically, the monastic rule that 
governs the life of all those who have ‘Gone Forth’ into Buddhist 
monastic life.
dukkha  
Literally, ‘hard to bear’ – dis-ease, restlessness of mind, anguish, con/f_lict, 
unsatisfactoriness, discontent, suﬀering. One of the three characteristics 
of conditioned phenomena; also the focus of the First Noble T ruth.
Entwives  
In JRR T olkien’s story /T_he Lord of the Rings, and other tales of his 
mythical Middle Earth, the Entwives were the female counterparts of the 
Ents, tall tree-like beings who liked to inhabit wild forests. At a certain 
point, when the gardens of the Entwives were destroyed by the male/f_icent 
entity Sauron, they disappeared – gone to places unknown by others. 
/T_his was to the great sorrow of the Ents, who sorely hoped they would be 
able to be reunited with them one day. 
Four Noble Truths  
/T_he core teaching of the Buddha. /T_he T ruth of Unsatisfactoriness; the 
T ruth of the Origin of Unsatisfactoriness; the T ruth of the Cessation of 
Unsatisfactoriness;  the T ruth of the Path Leading to the Cessation of 
Unsatisfactoriness.
Further Shore   
A synonym for Enlightenment, the realization of Nibbāna.
gun· adhamma  
Essential spiritual quality; ‘virtue’, particularly as an attribute of the heart 
rather than as an agreed behaviour. Most commonly used in combination 
with the components of the T riple Gem, i.e. Buddha-gun·a, Dhammagun·a, San·gha-gun·a.
jantāghara  
Literally: ‘/f_ire house’; a sauna or steam-chamber used in monasteries as a 
support for physical health.
‘jātipi dukkha…’
Literally: ‘birth is unsatisfactory…’; part of the oft-repeated re/f_lections on 
‘dukkha’, or ‘unsatisfactoriness’, in the Buddha’s teachings.
kamma  
Action or cause which is created by habitual impulses, volitions, 
intentions. In popular usage, as the word ‘karma’, its meaning often 
includes the result or eﬀect of the action, although the proper term for 
this result is vipāka.
kamma-vipāka
/T_he combination of an intentional act and the results that come from it. 
karun·ā   
Compassion; one of the Sublime Abidings.
khandha
Literally: ‘group’, ‘aggregate’, ‘heap’ or ‘lump’ – the term the Buddha 
used to refer to each of the /f_ive components of psycho-physical existence 
(form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, consciousness).
kut·ī   
A hut; a secluded and simple dwelling for a monk or a nun.
lokamānī  
Literally: ‘a conceiver of the world’.
lokasaññī  
Literally: ‘a perceiver of the world’.
Copper Isle.indb   111 05/12/2021   15:46

112
maechee  
An Eight-Precept, female renunciant in the /T_hai monastic tradition.
mahā-set· t·hi  
A person of great wealth; a millionaire or tycoon; a descriptive term often 
used in the Pali Canon to refer to a wealthy supporter of the Sangha, 
such as Visākhā or Anathapin·d· ika.
Mahāsi meditation   
/T_he meditation technique developed and taught by Ven. Mahāsi 
Sayadaw, one of the pre-eminent Buddhist meditation teachers of the 
latter part of the 20
th Century. He was also the founder of the Mahāsi 
Yeiktha Meditation Centre in Yangon, Myanmar, one of the /f_irst places to 
provide Buddhist meditation instruction to lay people in modern times.
mahā-upāsikā  
Literally: ‘Eminent female lay disciple’; a descriptive term often used to 
refer to notable female lay disciples such as Visākhā.
Mahāvam· sa   
Literally: ‘/T_he Great Chronicle’; a historical epic poem, composed at the 
Abhayagiri Vihāra, in the 5
th Century CE.
muditā   
sympathetic joy; delight at the good fortune of others; one of the Sublime 
Abidings.
nāma-khandhas
/T_he four qualities that comprise mind (see ‘khandha’, above).
Ola  
Ola is a type of long, narrow palm leaf used in Southern India and Sri 
Lanka, when dried and /f_lattened, for writing traditional manuscripts on. 
/T_he leaves are from the talipot tree, a type of palm.
Pāt·imokkha  
/T_he Buddhist monastic Rule, recited every fortnight, on the full and new 
moon days.
Pali/pālibhasa
/T_he ancient Indian language of the Pali Canon, akin to Sanskrit.
panta rhei (Greek)  
‘Everything /f_lows’ – a famous statement by the classical Greek 
philosopher Heraclitus. 
pāramī/pāramitā  
Literally: ‘means of going across’, perfection. /T_he T en Perfections in 
/T_heravāda Buddhism for realizing Buddhahood are giving, morality, 
renunciation, wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, determination, 
loving-kindness and equanimity.
prān· a (Skt.)/pāna (Pali)
Literally: ‘breath’; also the life energy, vital force or chi (Chinese) that 
is understood, in many Asian philosophical and yogic systems, to /f_low 
through the body and the universe.
Precepts
/T_he guidelines for skilful behaviour described and encouraged by the 
Buddha. /T_hese are codi/f_ied into various numbers and types of Precepts 
according to an individual’s spiritual commitment or formal adoption of 
lay discipleship or monastic training.
pūjā   
A devotional oﬀering, chanting, bowing, garlands of /f_lowers etc.; 
technically this is called ‘amisa-pūjā’, ‘a material oﬀering’. /T_he word ‘pūjā’ 
can also be used, in the term ‘pat·ipati-pūjā’, as meaning ‘dedicating one’s 
whole spiritual practice as an oﬀering’.
pujārī  
A person who leads a devotional ceremony.
Copper Isle.indb   112 05/12/2021   15:46

113
Rains Retreat  
/T_he three month period between the full moon of July and the full moon 
of October that the Buddha established for his monastics to reside in 
one place, owing to it being the monsoon season in South and Southeast Asia. In the Southern T radition this retreat period is observed quite 
strictly and thus forms a pivotal season for the year. /T_he time is ideally 
spent in devotion to meditation and study.
rūpa  
Material form; the body; one of the /f_ive khandhas. /T_he physical elements 
that make up the body, i.e. earth, water, /f_ire and wind (solidity, cohesion, 
temperature and vibration). Also often used as a shorthand term for a 
Buddha image.
rūpa-khandha  
Material form; the body; one of the /f_ive khandhas.
‘Sabba roga...’  
Literally: ‘All disease…’; the opening words of a blessing chant.
sālā  
A hall, usually where the monastics eat their food and where other 
ceremonies are held.
saman· a-saññā  
Literally: ‘the perception of a renunciant’; the quality of attitude, 
embracing simplicity, fewness of needs and harmlessness, that is 
encouraged for those who have entered monastic life.
Sangha (Eng.)/San/periodcentered.titlinggha (Pali)                
/T_he community of those who practise the Buddha’s Way. More 
speci/f_ically, those who have formally committed themselves to the 
lifestyle of mendicant monks and nuns. 
San/periodcentered.titlinggha Nāyaka
/T_he head of one branch, or nikāya, of the monastic community, in the Sri 
Lankan system of Sangha administrative structures.
saññā
Perception; one of the /f_ive khandhas.
sīladhārā  
Literally: ‘one who upholds virtue’; a term used for Buddhist nuns goneforth under Ajahn Sumedho’s guidance.
sīmā  
A designated boundary or territory within which formal and legal acts 
of the Sangha must take place in order to be valid. Often this boundary 
is established around a hall used for the ceremonies of Going Forth and 
Full Acceptance that are part of committing to monastic training. 
Sinhalese
/T_he ethnic type and language of the largest group of people living in 
Sri Lanka. /T_his community is predominantly and historically of the 
Buddhist faith. 
strangling /f_ig  
/T_his is the common name for a number of tropical and subtropical plant 
species, including some banyans and unrelated vines, that grow around 
a ‘parent tree’ and eventually cause their death. In the scriptures (e.g. at 
Dhp 162) the Buddha speaks of the māluvā creeper,/uni00A0a parasite which 
slowly destroys the tree on which it has grown.
stūpa  
Literally: ‘a heap’; this is usually a round, mound-like or hemispherical 
structure, customarily containing relics of the Buddha or the remains 
of Buddhist monks or nuns after cremation; it is used as a place of 
meditation, pilgrimage and devotional practices.
Copper Isle.indb   113 05/12/2021   15:46

114
sutta (Pali)/sūtra (Skt.) 
Literally: ‘a thread’; a discourse given by the Buddha or one of his 
disciples.
Tamil  
/T_he ethnic type and language of the second largest group of people living 
in Sri Lanka. /T_his community is predominantly and historically of the 
Hindu faith.
Tathāgata                 
‘/T_hus gone’ or ‘/T_hus come’ – one who has gone beyond suﬀering and 
mortality; one who experiences things as they are, without delusion. /T_he 
epithet that the Buddha applied to himself.
/T_hai Forest Tradition  
An informal lineage of monastics, largely originating in North-east 
/T_hailand but now spread around the world, committed to the practice 
of meditation and following the standards of austerity and discipline 
espoused by Ven. Ajahn Mun Bhuridatto (1870-1949). Ven. Ajahn Chah 
lived according to these standards, and all the monasteries founded by his 
disciples endeavour to adhere to these principles too.
/T_heravāda  
Literally: ‘/T_he Way of the Elders’; the Buddhism of South and South-east 
Asia. Also known as ‘/T_he Southern T radition’.
tipit·aka pāli  
Literally: ‘the three baskets of Pali texts’; the Pali Canon; the entirety of 
the teachings of the Buddha understood to have been given during his 
lifetime. /T_hese were committed to memory by his disciples and codi/f_ied 
at the First Council, at Rājagaha, during the Rains Retreat immediately 
after the Buddha’s Final Passing Away (Parinibbāna). /T_he ‘three baskets’ 
are: the Discourses (Sutta), the Monastic Discipline (Vinaya), and the 
Analytical T eachings (Abhidhamma). 
upasampadā  
/T_he ceremony of Full Acceptance, or full ordination, as a monk or a nun.
upāya   
Skilful means; a method of practice or instruction.
vacca-kut·ī  
A toilet.
vānara   
A monkey.
vassa   
/T_he three month annual retreat (see ‘Rains Retreat’, above).
vatta-sālā  
Literally: ‘circular hall’. /T_he somewhat unique Round T emple found at 
Polonnaruwa.
vijjā-dhātu  
Literally: ‘the element of knowing’; the awakened awareness of the pure 
heart; the formless, transcendent wisdom that is aware without delusion; 
also referred to as ‘supramundane wisdom’ (lokuttara-paññā) and ‘the eye 
of wisdom’ (paññā-cakkhu), ‘the one who knows’ and by other terms. 
vihāra   
A dwelling place.
Vinaya   
/T_he Buddhist monastic discipline, or the scriptural collection of its rules 
and commentaries on them.
vipāka  
/T_he results of an action. /T_he eﬀects of a cause, formed by an intentional 
act. Often this word on its own is used as a shorthand for the fuller 
expression ‘vipāka-kamma’. 
Copper Isle.indb   114 05/12/2021   15:46

115
Wat Pah Nanachat  
/T_he International Forest Monastery, founded in 1975 by Ajahn 
Sumedho, as a branch of Ajahn Chah’s main monastery, Wat Pah Pong. 
It was established principally to be a centre for Westerners interested to 
train under Ajahn Chah’s system of Dhamma practice. It is located in 
Ubon Province, North-east /T_hailand.
yakkha  
A male celestial demon; one of the denizens of realm called ‘/T_he Heaven 
of the Four Great Kings’, according to Buddhist cosmology.
yakkhinī
A female celestial demon; one of the denizens of realm called ‘/T_he 
Heaven of the Four Great Kings’, according to Buddhist cosmology.
ABBREVIA TIONS
D: Dīgha Nikāya, /T_he Long Discourses of the Buddha.
M: Majjhima Nikāya, /T_he Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha.
S: Sam· yutta Nikāya, /T_he Discourses Related by Subject.
Dhp: Dhammapada, A collection of the Buddha’s teachings, in verse 
form.
Copper Isle.indb   115 05/12/2021   15:46

116
Copper Isle Miles
By Ajahn Amaro
2021©A2 Publications
Amaravati Buddhist Monastery
St Margarets
Great Gaddesden
Hemel Hempstead
Hertfordshire HPI 3BZ
ISBN: 978-1-78432-185-7
For permission to reprint or translate this text please contact 
publications@amaravati.org
Also available for download from amaravati.org
Cover and text design and formatting: Mark Gatter
/T_his book is oﬀered for free distribution. Please do not sell this book.
/T_his work is licensed under the creative commons Attribution-noncommercial-nonderivatives 4.0 international license
T o view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
See the last page of this book for more details on your rights and restrictions under this license
/T_his edition printed in 2021
Copper Isle.indb   116 05/12/2021   15:46

117
/T_his work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
T o view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
y copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
/T_he licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
y Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. 
You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
y Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
y No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you may not distribute the modi/f_ied material.
y No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others 
from doing anything the license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the public domain or where your use is 
permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. /T_he license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, 
other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.
Copper Isle.indb   117 05/12/2021   15:46

Back cover - final.indd   1Back cover - final.indd   1 13/11/2021   08:5713/11/2021   08:57