# 10 – Rapture and Ease

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to rapture’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to rapture.’

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to ease’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to ease.’

##### Instructions

Let the refreshment of the unconstricted body be felt in the mind. Tune into that uplifting energy as it soothes agitation, brightens dullness and unravels speculative thought.

Emotionally withdraw a little to cool any mental excitement that arises. Check the pauses. Aim for contentment rather than high spots.

##### Concentration is based on pleasure

Does this heading come as a surprise? Well, read on ….

The practice of clearing the mind through mindfulness of breathing is obviously an embodied one. It’s an approach that accesses the life-energy in breathing and uses it to clean, strengthen and reset what we experience as mind. In the course of so doing, the roles of the twofold mental intelligence of the citta or ‘heart’ (awareness that is subjective and sensitive) and manas (intelligence that locates and measures an object) are revealed, and brought into a fruitful relationship with each other and with the body. To develop this in terms of harmony and steadiness leads to refined happiness, and the abiding in this is called ‘samādhi’.

Samādhi is generally translated as ‘concentration’ but to qualify that, I will refer to other words that appear as a definition of samādhi in the suttas – ‘unification’ (ekaggatā) and ‘singleness’ (ekodibhāva). These terms signify that things are coming together: mindfulness established in the body brings mental and bodily factors into a pleasingly harmonious union. So, rather than being a reference to the process of concentrating – a process that is accomplished through right mindfulness – samādhi refers to settling into the results of that mindfulness. You linger and settle in rather than hold tight.

The significance of an approach based on pleasure and harmony is that it brings heart-based sensitivity to the fore. This rules out the notion that manas – the intelligence with which we normally concentrate on a task – can be in sole command. Although that objective clarity has a part to play, the Ānāpānasati Sutta emphasizes feeling, sensitizing, calming and happiness – functions of heart. Through the careful engagement of vitakka-vicāra with the felt quality of breathing, samādhi arrives. The training is about being receptive, and adjusting your thinking mind to serve that process.

The immediate antecedent to this unification is the paired experience of pīti (rapture, refreshment) and sukha (ease, pleasure). This pair are qualified as being born of viveka (disengagement). Through disengagement from unwholesome qualities (hindrances), and from the conditions they are based on – the mind settles into the relaxed breath-energy. As this settling deepens, a pleasure that is both bright and easeful arises. When this becomes evident, the citta resonates with perceptual signs, such as warmth, spaciousness or light.

Naturally, in order to supervise this process, one has to be single-minded. This single-mindedness is of intent, but also of contact: the citta has one impression that it unifies around. As this becomes the case, awareness collects where the breath-energy’s steady, radiant effect can be dwelt upon – rather like reading a pulse. This settling has a consolidating effect, and in tandem with that, there is enjoyment. This encourages the meditator to soak up the deepening quality of the meditative experience – which is an amalgam of subtle body energy, mental focus and heartfelt uplift and ease. Such a ‘soaking up’, a working of skilful qualities into the embodied mind, is called ‘jhāna’ – a term that I’ll discuss later.

##### Practical Details

###### Clearing the world from the heart

The instructions indicate no break between calming the kāyasaṅkhāra and being sensitive to rapture; in practice, the first tetrad flows into the second. There is, however, a significant clearance and adjustment that needs to happen in following that flow. Essentially this amounts to clearing the five hindrances and the world-view that they support. This clearance is made possible by the steady embodied energy that has arisen in the first tetrad, as well as a shift away from the strategies and attitudes of the world in general.

This is because the dominant socio-cultural model that we live within supports hindrances. Sense-desire is encouraged by the repeatedly emphasized message that life is enriched by consuming more, even beyond one’s reasonable needs. Politics, especially nationalist, legitimizes ill-will, fear and mistrust of others to the point of armed conflict. A kind of lethargy settles over us as we experience the disempowerment that comes as authority is given to a financial and political elite and their systems. On account of these, we’re unsettled, not at home, restless and worried. Hence anxiety is prevalent, as is its partner, depression. These rob us of any confidence; life seems meaningless. This is the grim culmination of the hindrance that goes under the innocuous name of ‘doubt’. ‘Why am I here? What’s the point? Where is there something I can trust?’

Assumptions about my rights or needs or how other people should be can disguise ill-will; a philosophical shrug at challenging situations may cloak underlying dullness and lethargy. Therefore, it’s wise to refer a mind-state to what is happening in the body: then you can directly sense righteousness, self-criticism, and even perfectionism as forms of ill-will. A lethargic state may be revealed under the guise of ‘non-attachment’; on the other hand, a compulsion to ‘get things done’ may in fact be restlessness.

Even if we have pushed these influences to one side so that they are not rampant, the mindset that they encourage (and which pushing aside also fosters) is one of being an isolated individual who has to be in control so that she/he will get away from annoying things, get the goods, have guaranteed security and so on. We assume that this tense and constricted scenario is normal. It can become so. We lose faith in the mind as a naturally receptive intelligence, and treat it as something that has to be driven. Then, although the busy lifestyle that all this entails makes us energized rather than lethargic, the energy is overactive and centres in the head and in ideas and notions. So the heart gets put aside and we become insensitive – and, lacking joy, we get beset with restless anxiety and doubt. The point is that the ‘do it, make it happen, put more effort in to get the good stuff’ attitudes lack the skill and sensitivity to sustain mindfulness in a comfortable way. An approach that leaves out the heart can’t relieve the body of tension, and this makes the breathing uncomfortable and difficult to follow. Therefore we need to energize and maintain receptivity; ease and composure depend on a heart-based focus.

Hindrances may also be dormant. For example, I may feel peaceful if things are going my way, but when that changes … I realize that ‘my way’ has a certain push to it. If that self-view becomes wilful, not only does it impair relationships with others, it also constricts the heart (and its energy) and supports hindrances: I get stuck, forceful – and take that personally. Taking anxiety or sexuality personally through following the thoughts and emotions that they bring up will just embed these energies more deeply. This is where an insightful understanding offers a clear perspective: put aside the personal assumptions, drives and time frame, and form a careful and healthy relationship with the embodied condition. Then calming and steadying can take place so that a rich and embodied sensitivity gains authority over the hindered state. It is this, rather than the personal will, that can effectively handle heart-energies and psychological formations.

##### Attune to the open energy

Embodied practice thus transforms our approach and mindset. It bypasses self-view to directly unbind hindering reflexes and enrich the heart. And, by presenting happiness as a result, it offers an agreeable alternative to ingrained personal psychologies. As the mindful heart attends to embodied sensitivity, ‘getting my way’ feels hard and insensitive, and ‘getting ahead’ feels pressurized. These worldly approaches feel like unnecessary stress, and don’t resolve passion, fear and doubt. Instead, we breathe through our world with its energies and psychologies – and an increasingly steady receptivity arises. This change of heart changes the ‘shape’, or sign, of the citta: from narrow and hard it becomes wide and malleable. If we pick up and linger on that sign, there is a release from constriction, and rapture and ease come into being.

These effects may first be sensed as a kind of relief, then as a refreshing peacefulness. If you linger in that, the pressure of self-view abates, and hindrances don’t take over. The effect is both uplifting and energizing (pīti) and easeful (sukha) – and as awareness expands in that state, hindrances dissolve.

A meditator who has accessed this experience a few times, however, will sense that the rapturous aspect itself is a little too busy. It stimulates, and that adds ripples to a depth and serenity that it would be good to settle into more fully. So there is an inclination towards ease.

Attending to the open energy of the pause is valuable here. Bearing that in mind, review the wave-like nature of pīti, and the steadier quality of sukha. Ease feels more comfortable. In cases of imbalance, the move into that open energy at the end of the inhalation feels different from the movement into the end of the exhalation. One may feel more hasty or blurred. If so, spread open awareness to include the pauses and the movement as aspects of one continuum. This will encourage greater balance and ease.

The non-sensual basis of this kind of pleasure, as well as the inclination to the cool pleasure of ease, transform your world. The heart refines and opens. Then it can be investigated: rapture feels less steady and comfortable; ease encourages greater sensitivity. In the steady focus born of disengaging from sensuality, and of subsequently eliminating the tense or contracted features of the inner body, pleasure can be steady and sustained. And so the inclination of the citta turns – in a way that has life-changing ramifications.