# 2 – Guided by the Buddha’s View

I find it inspiring to be handling the words that the Buddha gave as guidelines for this meditation practice. To imagine him offering these phrases gives rise to a sense of respect for the terminology that he used, for what he said and what he didn’t say, as well as for the process that he outlined. So, this book refers to the classical discourses on this practice. The root texts that I refer to are the collection of teachings in the Ānāpānasati Saṃyutta in the Connected Discourses (Saṃyutta Nikāya, Chap. 54) and the Ānāpānasati Sutta from the Middle Length Discourses (Majjhima Nikāya, 118). It may be that the Saṃyutta collection provided the raw material for the more polished and complete Majjhima discourse. Anyway, both these and the early Sanskrit versions (Āgama) of the texts present ānāpānasati in terms of sixteen instructions that connect mindfulness of breathing to the four establishments of mindfulness (satipaṭṭhāna) and the seven factors of awakening (bojjhaṅga). This interweaving of satipaṭṭhāna, bojjhaṅga and ānāpānasati amply indicates why ‘mindfulness of in-and-out breathing is … of great fruit.’ These results issue from a line of practice that is encapsulated in this sixteen-step instruction; this guideline is therefore the thematic axis of this book.

We can pick up the thread here:

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. So satova assasati satova passasati.

There is the case where a bhikkhu, having gone to the wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty building, sits down folding his legs crosswise, holds his body erect, and sets mindfulness to the fore. Mindful, he breathes in; mindful, he breathes out.

Dīghaṃ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ ti pajānāti, dīghaṃ vā passasanto ‘dīghaṃ passasāmī’ ti pajānāti;

Breathing in long, one directly knows: ‘breathing in long’; or breathing out long, one directly knows: ‘breathing out long.’

rassaṃ vā assasanto ‘rassaṃ assasāmī’ ti pajānāti, rassaṃ vā passasanto ‘rassaṃ passasāmī’ ti pajānāti;

Breathing in short, one directly knows: ‘breathing in short’; or breathing out short, one directly knows: ‘breathing out short.’* *

‘sabbakāyapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘sabbakāyapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to the entire body’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to the entire body.’

‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati.

One trains: ‘breathe in calming bodily formation’; one trains: ‘breathe out calming bodily formation.’

‘Pītipaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘pītipaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to rapture’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to rapture.’

‘sukhapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘sukhapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to ease’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to ease.’

‘cittasaṅkhārapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘cittasaṅkhārapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati.

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to mental formation’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to mental formation.’

‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in calming mental formation’; one trains: ‘breathe out calming mental formation.’

‘Cittapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘cittapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to mind/heart.’

abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains ‘breathe in deeply gladdening mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out deeply gladdening mind/heart.’

‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in steadying mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out steadying mind/heart.’

‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in releasing mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out releasing mind/heart.’

‘Aniccānupassī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘aniccānupassī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing changeability’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing changeability.’

‘virāgānupassī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘virāgānupassī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing dispassion’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing dispassion.’

‘nirodhānupassī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘nirodhānupassī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing cessation’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing cessation.’

‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ ti sikkhati;

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing relinquishment’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing relinquishment.’

Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā.

This is how mindfulness of in- and out-breathing is developed and made much of so as to be of great fruit, of great benefit.

There are a number of ways of translating the Pali text, but here I’ve used terms and syntax that are fairly standard to catch the meaning of the text and guide the practice. Some terms are rather cryptic, but I’ll explain these as we go along.

##### A structure of tetrads

Firstly, overviewing the structure of these sixteen instructions, we can see why they’re generally listed as four separate ‘tetrads’, that is, four clusters containing four instructions each. This is because the first tetrad refers to the body and its ‘formation’, that is, the weave of energies that sustains and moderates the workings of the body; the second tetrad refers to the ‘mental formation’, i.e. the energies and attitudes that formulate the mind or heart; the third tetrad refers to this mind (or heart), citta; and the fourth tetrad uses a different frame of reference altogether. That is, the first three tetrads refer to getting involved with the material we’re working with – in other words, fully sensitizing to the entire body and its energies, to mental formation, and to mind, with an intent to soothe and steady. All these are calming, cleansing practices, or samatha. The fourth tetrad, on the other hand, details ‘anupassi’ – that is, ‘seeing in the presence of’ or ‘witnessing’. This is in line with the development of insight (vipassanā). Taken as a whole, the presentation of the instructions suggests that one first gets one’s body and mind settled and steady, and then the process of insight can proceed.

However, although the form of the instructions has to be laid out in separate categories, in practice the tetrads interplay, rather as a thumb would interact with the fingers of a hand. A similar pattern of instruction occurs with the satipaṭṭhāna template: one works with ‘mental phenomena’ (dhammā), the fourth establishment, in tandem with mindfulness of the first satipaṭṭhāna, that of the body, and the second and third – feeling and mind-states. It’s not a rigidly sequential process: the meditator doesn’t have to work through body, feeling and mind-states before he or she uses the dhamma of mindfulness or of energy to counteract the dhamma of restlessness or of sense-desire. Another example of this interwoven pattern is in the Four Noble Truths; the Fourth Noble Truth of the Path is initiated by acknowledging the First – that of suffering and stress. One doesn’t have to have arrived at cessation, the Third Truth, before the Path can be glimpsed and undertaken.

In terms of ānāpānasati, the fourth tetrad, the theme of ‘witnessing’, can occur with reference to body, mental formation or mind itself. It’s also not the case that samatha and vipassanā are undertaken in a strictly sequential way: the Buddha mentions that samatha and vipassanā are to be practised in tandem (A.4:170; S.45:159). This conjoined approach becomes eminently practical and symbiotic: the dispassion of witnessing has a calming effect; and the calming of body and mind support an in-depth witnessing of the roots of their agitation, stagnation, gladness and ease. These categories and approaches interplay. One might, for instance, witness the changeability of bodily experience, and that will affect the emotional reactivity of citta, so that it becomes more serenely aware. As another example: acknowledging and relinquishing the control-achieve mental formation as one tries to maintain a focus on breathing will lead to a calmer and more sensitive bodily energy – so breathing calms and comes to the fore. And again, if the body feels more relaxed, balanced and malleable, then afflictive mental energies and attitudes subside and wiser ones arise.

Taken as a whole, the tetrads can be seen as describing layers of experience, in which the embodied layer comes first; then as one steadies and calms that, the layers of mental formation and mind can be viewed and cultivated – rather as one might, through unblocking and calming the erratic flow of a stream, discern and calm the underlying currents and see the bed of that stream. So, with the calming of bodily energy, the mental dynamics of mood, attitude and psychological conditioning can be seen and dealt with – in the same embodied frame of reference. This is because, at an energetic level, body and mind are codependent. Calming the body, one calms the mind; stressing the mind, one stresses the body. When there is a release in terms of worry or aversion, there will be an embodied response of ease. Everything works together. This codependency instructs the meditator; any wrong attitude such as pressurizing or trying to hold on to some fortunate state – however rational that may seem – will have a counterproductive effect on the bodily energy. Such learning is the basis for ending suffering or stress, and the realization of nibbāna.

As a footnote to the instructions: the use of direct speech may suggest that one consciously thinks these phrases; however, direct speech is used simply because indirect speech is very rarely adopted in Pali texts. So where the Pali text has ‘one directly knows “breathing in long”’, the normal English usage would be ‘one directly knows that one is breathing in long’. An internal monologue is certainly not recommended!