# 6 – Get to the Point

Unification of heart [cittassa ekaggatā]… is concentration …. (M.44:12)

##### Develop focus

I haven’t specified a particular point in the body at which to place attention in order to be mindful of breathing.1 This is because the Buddha didn’t leave any instruction to do so. Nor does ‘concentration’ (samādhi) mean holding attention onto a particular point – samādhi is a state that the mind enters into as it settles down and feels at ease. Such inner stability is the result of sustained mindfulness.

Discarding any hindrance to mindfulness is a major point. To this end, moving attention slowly around the body through placing-and-sensing is a useful exercise for developing agility and precision of focus, so that the mind doesn’t get bogged down with, or spin out into, thoughts, passions and agitation. Also, when meditating on breathing, a focus can be placed on any part of the body that is affected by the flow of breath – nostrils, back of the throat, centre of the chest, or diaphragm are obvious examples. Conducted in the right way, and gradually widening the focus to include more of the felt body, such exercises will support right effort and right mindfulness and help to dislodge obsessive thoughts.

However, as the sutta suggests, the main gathering point is the upright axis. Slowly sweeping attention along that axis (like stroking a cat) should smooth out any distortions and freshen up numb places in that axis; over time, the energy of breathing will flow in line with that and open through a widening area of your body. I would caution against placing attention on a narrow point, unless it calls for your kind attention. Experience indicates that many people these days live in a contracted bodily condition that goes along with pressurized mind-states. When the default of attention is to be narrow and driven, when the embodied energies are tense or numb (to the degree that a comfortable experience of the body as an entirety is rare or unknown), the instruction to focus on one point in the body can be problematic.

It’s also good to remember that the meditation is on breathing, not on the breath. So whereas focusing on the breath will generally mean focusing on sensations in the body where the air strikes it,_ breathing_ is a process that affects the body’s energy system – which connects directly to the citta as ‘heart’. Moreover, the instructions mention being fully sensitive to the entire body; in which case focusing on one particular point would only be relevant in order to bring that area in line with the whole body. In which case I’d recommend bearing that point in mind and steadily widening the focus to cover your physical (and felt) form.

##### The breath of life

We should consider that in India, as in China and other ancient cultures, the breath wasn’t just air moving between the nose and the lungs; it was understood to be the life force, the channel for both vitality and the spirit. You may have heard of prāṇāyāma, the yogic skill of using breathing to harness subtle bodily energy – well, that prāṇa (breath-energy) is the Sanskrit for what Pali renders as pāṇa.2 So, the physical action of breathing in and out moves pāṇa through the body, wherein it acts upon the body’s energy system (kāyasaṅkhāra), in a benevolent and liberating way. This is because breathing as an energetic process connects directly to the nervous system and through that to mental energy, emotions, and subtler aspects of awareness. It also acts as the channel for spiritual intelligence to come forth and moderate the short-term perspectives and wilfulness of the secular materialist mindset. ‘Pāṇa’ has a fuller connotation than that of the materialist view of breath as a flow of air; it is a gate to mystical experience and liberation.

This understanding should affect one’s approach by encouraging attitudes and inclinations that bring forth one’s aspiration. An overhaul of one’s inclinations and attitudes is always a good point to begin with; as is mentioned in the Kāyagatāsati Sutta: ‘As he abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, his memories and intentions based on the household life are abandoned; with their abandoning, his heart becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness [ekodhibhūtaṃ], and concentrated. That is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness immersed in the body.’ (M.119:21)

Putting aside the topics and the energies associated with owning, planning and regretting is an essential part of meditation practice. It’s not that such topics are morally wrong, but if they bring an agitated, hasty energy with them, or if they stimulate fault-finding and anxiety, heart and mind aren’t going to settle. If you find a topic can’t be put aside, you should investigate more deeply the effect it has on you, and consider how to breathe calm energy into that state. Concentration and singleness of heart come about through filtering and pruning mental content and approach, not through focusing on a point in the body.

##### One-pointedness is a matter of heart

There is a term ‘ekaggatā’ that is often translated as ‘one-pointedness’; but rather than referring to a physical point, it is associated with mental and bodily composure. In the discourses this most commonly occurs as one of a list of factors associated with absorption (jhāna) – which ānāpānasati can lead to. The Buddha mentions this when describing his own awakening: ‘Tireless energy was aroused in me and unremitting mindfulness was established, my body was tranquil and untroubled, my heart steadied [samāhitaṃ] and unified [ekaggaṃ].’(M.4)

At A.4:12, ekaggatā is one of four groups of factors to be sustained while walking; the others being absence of hindrances, good energy and mindfulness, tranquillity and ease of body. Overall then, this ‘one-pointedness’ refers to a purposeful and settled mode of awareness, not to a microscopic focus. It’s a matter of heart. This is also evidenced by A.5:151, where ‘one listens to the Dhamma with an undistracted and one-pointed heart’: if this meant maintaining a one-pointedness based on the moment-by-moment arising of auditory consciousness, one wouldn’t be able to appreciate the meaning of the discourse.

To review the practice from another source: the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta (M.10) refers to mindfulness of breathing by using the simile of a lathe-operator focusing on the turning of a length of wood. This implies steady attention – but the one-pointedness is an attribute of the attention, rather than a point on the wood (which is moving). The other attribute of that focus is that it discerns whether that turn is long or short. The sense seems to be that an undistracted purpose encourages the focus to be both subtly flexible to accommodate rather than pin down the flow of the breathing process, and at the same time be a manifestation of a single intent.

The impression that comes across in these readings is that wayward and agitated thinking has to be abandoned so that one can steadily bear a theme in mind (that is, mindfulness is established). Once established, mindfulness of body is likened to a post to which the outwards-turning senses (conceiving, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching) are tethered (S.35:247). With regard to this, one can bear the upright axis of the body in mind. Thus there is a very open but firm bodily posture, within which body energy, gathered and moderated by breathing, will calm. And when the body feels calm, heart and mind easily settle.

As a purposeful and receptive attention meets the breathing, mental and bodily energies settle together. A focus will arise where they meet most comfortably and naturally. Then one is not straining to focus, nor is one’s attention moving around the body wondering which point to focus on. Through sustained mindfulness of that state, the mind disengages from the pull of the senses, thoughts and memories, feels the pleasure of that, and directly knows that pleasure. Thus from the single-minded purpose – to steady and ease body, heart and mind – energy consolidates on a non-sensual basis.

##### Tools to improve attention

In the tradition of practising ānāpānasati, various means have been tried and passed on as supportive in terms of sustaining mindfulness of breathing. Here are a few:

Silently intone ‘Bud’ throughout the duration of an inhalation, and ‘dho’ throughout an exhalation.

Pros: Good for terminating distracting thoughts.

Cons: One can get distracted by forming the words and trying to stretch a syllable over an inhalation or exhalation.

Count each exhalation from one to ten; if you forget the number of the exhalation, go back to ‘one’.

Pros: This is good for retentive mindfulness.

Cons: One can make getting the numbers right into a kind of game, and thereby prioritize enumeration over sampling the quality of the breathing. This method also cuts the unbroken flow of breath-energy into separate breaths, thereby ignoring the pause.

Count the length of an exhalation, or of both an exhalation and an inhalation.

Pros: This is good for studying breath-energy and slowing it down. A fairly calm breath could take five seconds or so to complete, but if you linger and relax more deeply in the pause, the breath-rhythm might slow further. The consensus of all traditions is that less breathing is better for health and calm; it allows the energy to be more completely absorbed, so less breath is needed and the mind gets less activated.

Cons: One can strain to control the breathing, thereby generating tension.

In all cases, beware of getting anxious about mistakes, or becoming too goal-oriented. Having a friendly and easeful attitude helps to encourage the citta to linger in the pauses; and it’s the pauses that naturally moderate the breathing process and allow the energies to settle and calm. This is a natural process, so let the body breathing guide you steadily through the cycle of inhalation, pause, exhalation and pause: it’s the smoothness of that cycle that has a calming effect, so let the inhalations and exhalations subside into the pause and change at their own rate. This will release constrictions around breathing.

Whatever method you use, what is needed is to place attention (vitakka) and sense what it has been placed on (vicāra). That is – when the attention wanders excessively, notice that, pause and add a note: ‘How do I sense breathing out, now?’ Wait for an out-breath to become apparent and then release awareness into its stream. Over time you’ll notice the citta gets quieter and firmer and supportive words are needed less and less.

When attention is liberated, however temporarily, from unnecessary thoughts and distracting moods, the mind is experienced as a sensitive, steady awareness. Its vital energies aren’t being used up in extraneous or negative moods and notions, so they collect. This collected awareness can be directed with vitakka-vicāra to locate and unpick obstructions where they arise as turbulence or hindrances (nīvaraṇa). However, don’t focus on the thoughts and stories that flavour these hindrances – instead, notice them as either scurries of thought and emotion or areas of agitation or constriction in the body. And breathe through them: ‘How do I sense breathing in all this?’

In terms of the body, the afflicted areas will most likely be a) the head – the jaw and the band that includes the eyes and forehead, and b) the diaphragm and the area below the navel. Subtler restrictions may occur at the top of the chest just beneath the throat notch, and also at the base of the torso, where the legs join the trunk. Clearing these areas allows the breathing to first lengthen (as it is unconstricted) and consequently quieten down (as calm suffuses the body and mind). The long breath is one where most of the experience is of the flow of sensations, and the pause phase is minimal. As things calm down, however, the pauses lengthen and the track of sensations lessens; the inhale-exhale phases of the breathing grow briefer and merge into the pause phase. It may seem that one is hardly breathing, but it’s just that the respiration that uses muscles is becoming less necessary. This is ‘breathing in  [out] short’: breathing is slower with longer pauses. And yet, as it’s associated with a quiet mind and bright energy, it’s very refreshing.

1. One argument is that when the word ‘parimukhaṃ’ is used with reference to establishing mindfulness, it means placing it at the nose-tip – because ‘mukha’ can mean ‘mouth’, or ‘entrance’. However, ‘mukha’ can also mean ‘foremost’ – as in the case of something being at the fore of one’s attention or aims. As the prefix ‘pari’ denotes ‘final’ or ‘completely’ (parinibbāna – ‘final nibbāna’; parisuddhi – ‘completely pure’), ‘parimukhaṃ’ would emphasize this sense – i.e. one is placing ‘mindfulness to the fore’, or ‘prioritizing mindfulness’. A reference to a ‘complete mouth’ doesn’t make sense.

2. One important distinction to make between prāṇāyāma and ānāpānasati is that prāṇāyāma uses deliberate locks and retentions of breathing; ānāpānasati doesn’t.