# 18 – Insight: Maturing into Relinquishment

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing changeability’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing changeability.’

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing dispassion’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing dispassion.’

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing cessation’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing cessation.’

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing relinquishment’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing relinquishment.’

##### Changeability and dispassion

When a degree of stillness has been established, it’s easy to notice how changeable everything is. What is most changeable is the state of mind – by which I mean more than the obvious content of thoughts and emotions, but also the particular energy, inclination and subtle shape of the citta. One’s citta can be broad or unsteady or sluggish or vibrant. What then is still? What is aware of this citta? And why is it important to focus on changeability in this respect?

The simple answer to all of these questions is the nature of the citta. It is both the subtle form and the reflective ‘knowing’ of that. It is both still awareness and sensitive heart. Just as a lake will always offer some kind of reflection, and yet is often stirred and rippling, the citta is both constantly aware and also circumstantially resonant and affected by contact – so its awareness is often clouded or shaky. What it’s aware of are habitual psychological activities, saṅkhārā, that create subtle forms – rather like the ripples and vortices on a lake. These forms attract energy into them, energy that amplifies and solidifies the vortex. In more down-to-earth terms, we get obsessive. Thus there is kamma: there is engagement with obsessions, and we get formed by them. But this is a curable habit.

To get things into the right perspective for that cure: it’s not that there are lots of thoughts that flood the mind; instead, it’s the case that as the cittasaṅkhāra gets engrossed it generates perceptions, impulses and thoughts. (So rather than there being things to annihilate, it’s more the case that there are energies that need to be stilled.) Sure, we might speak of having lots of unpleasant thoughts, but can there be a thought that exists as something independent of the energy that forms it and the emotion that arouses that? It’s this conditioning force – one that gets stuck in thought-forming patterns – that can be trained. And this begins with shifting the habitual reactions to those thoughts and emotions. This is because if we get fascinated or averse to thoughts and emotions, that adds more emotional energy to the mental stream, and so intensifies the saṅkhāra vortex. Also if any aspect of the vortex – the thought, the reactions or the memory that it evokes – is seen as a separate thing, it’s fixated upon, and the fixation forms a person as the spinning centre of the vortex. It is because of all this spin and counter-spin, that the truth about vortices and how to release them is obscured: there’s the experience of being somebody having or doing mental stuff and getting overwhelmed.

But all that depends on ignorance. What if the vortex is seen as it is, rather than judged and made into a person? What about cooling the energies in all that? ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime – that is the stilling of all saṅkhāra, the relinquishment of all attachments [upadhi], the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’ (M.64:9) So, rather than try to annihilate perceptions, opinions and memories, calming moderates their energies and supports a witnessing of how a person gets created in that vortex. This apparent person is a continuum of changing psychologies, impressions, feelings, reactions, and skilful and unskilful inclinations. And through inquiring into the changes that any of these go through, insight arises.

Most obviously, any process – such as a line of thought, or a surge of emotion – begins and ends, or at least seems to. Insight therefore reviews these personal processes in terms of their apparent beginnings and endings. What you’ll find as you look for the beginning of a thought isn’t a person creating that thought, but a felt stirring that crystallizes into a train of thoughts with an underlying mood. You’ll also note a subsiding rather than a crisp stop. Where is the thinker in any of that? If your mind is calmer, notice the pause after a mood has passed through: if you stay aware at that point, you’ll notice that as the energy and the mood change, the mental process softens and diffuses. It’s like the mist that forms on cool glass. Observe the window of a room as you sit yourself next to it on a cold morning. Is there a drop-at-a-time forming of condensation, or doesn’t the overall surface gradually tint and grow misty? Doesn’t the mist evaporate if you warm the glass?

Similarly, when the citta is warm and open phenomena either don’t well up and crystallize, or they evaporate. And as thoughts, impressions, impulses and so on lose intensity, their mist-like nature is revealed; mistiest of all is the person. The trapped person is the result of the citta getting stirred up and reacting; but if that very heart of the conscious process doesn’t rise up, and grasp, it doesn’t get stuck. Moods and memories subside or are not taken personally; there is increasing dispassion, and energy moves from the saṅkhāra into the knowing. Thus awareness isn’t immersed in a state where suffering and stress and an overwhelming world arise.

##### Latent tendencies and cessation

This pattern of self keeps forming because of the underlying blueprint of the anusaya. Latent tendencies are like reflexes: when there is the pressure of self-view, along with a compulsive grasp in the heart, the anusaya reflex takes over. Then when an impression strikes the heart, energies tighten into pressure and grasping – and the spinning vortex of a personal formation becomes the reference point and centre. Accordingly, action gets compulsive and any one of the familiar persons that we form – responsible, firm, kindly, agitated, controlling, etc. – takes shape.

One powerful anusaya is that of becoming: we are all born with the latent tendency to be a solid and successful person.1 It wells up as bhav’āsava on account of circumstances that are taken personally – as in ‘this is happening in my life’ – or on account of habits and kamma (‘I’m like this’; ‘I’m this kind of a person because of my past actions’). The person arises dependent on what isn’t here and now, yet forms a basic reference point for the heart and mind: ‘I am sure that such and such an event is going to happen; so I must think about it.’ Or, ‘I have acted in such ways in the past; so now I must experience these memories and thoughts.’ It’s a tangled weave, this ‘I am’ vortex.

Thus becoming creates the sense of a person travelling through time. However, meditation reveals that the qualities that give rise to the sense of time – the drive towards another state, the pressure to maintain solidity within change, and the arising of memory – occur dependent on how the citta contracts, spins out or gets stuck. These are not a person, but a reflex. So when phenomena are revealed as ephemeral, and the citta relaxes its reflex, the experience of being a time-bound person need not occur. Thus the potential for suffering and stress bound up with getting to the next thing, finding an answer, harbouring malice, fantasizing and worrying can fall away.

The latent tendency towards conceiving self is conditioned by the need to manage what becoming makes solid. This vortex forms by holding onto forces, events and energies that it can’t manage. It tries to function well and make the right choice; but there are no guarantees that it will get things right. What is guaranteed is that it will always experience inner and outer events that it wants to get right. So the vortex feeds its own turbulence: that feedback loop – that’s the person. And occasionally the person realizes that they will malfunction at some time, make the wrong choice, or become powerless. Maybe other people will bar the person’s actions and choices; maybe the person will be forgetful, or inadequate; or maybe their health or mental balance will fail. What will the self experience, or be, then? Most likely it will be suffering and stress. So the person gets compulsive about dealing with everything that might go wrong, produces complex and convoluted mind-states – and gets stressed here and now.

Another powerful anusaya is towards views – because holding a point of view can weld its notions and beliefs into a firm basis for self. The grosser manifestation occurs with dogmatic belief, but the latent tendency is to grant supremacy to conceptual intelligence in general. Through this we know about something – we name it, measure and assess its value, and so on – and that process gives us reference points for how likeable or important we deem something to be, and consequently what to do with it. This process is particularly abusive when we apply it to living beings – including ourselves – as it focuses a harsh spotlight. It activates that mode of mind that is about doing and achieving – so much so that we assume that our life is limited to getting things done and getting things right in order to be good enough. Thus activated, the mind establishes our personal world on the basis of doing business, generating pleasure, and doing what it takes to belong. It’s a powerful vortex. But such activation doesn’t arrive at a stable state; it just produces more things to do and more choices to make. Nobody wins. So … can you allow yourself to sensitively, directly ‘know’ rather than have a point of view?

The most fundamental tendency is that of ignorance. It is this that blurs the knowing awareness of the citta so that it doesn’t know itself – therefore it loses balance. With that loss of balance, awareness attaches to some state of mind or another in order to find stability – and thus there becomes ‘I am in this state’. And ‘I am’ spins into ‘I do’, creating unstable thoughts, drives and attitudes … and this tumbling-on stimulates other reflex tendencies. How to stop this? Well, if one tries to erase the ‘I am’ – that ‘trying to get rid of’ brings more tilting and tumbling and entanglement. That approach is also an outflow, a negative vortex called ‘vibhava’. So instead of surging between becoming and negating, the practice is to shift from getting tangled up in the person and instead relate to the stress of the anusaya.

In practice, this means that rather than take issue with the topics and shifts of the mind, you lightly acknowledge the inner person who has them, and contemplate the vortex as a direct experience. (With goodwill, of course.) Similarly, with regard to your habits, your past and so on: can you acknowledge, firm up in your body so that there can be space around the mood and the energy of ‘I am’? This opens dispassionate awareness – and that penetrates inclination and feeling to provide a more stable abiding. In its equanimous embrace, the leaning self-corrects, and the citta stops creating things to lean into.

##### Unconditioned and relinquished

Release is possible because anusaya and grasping are habits, not fixed realities. Citta has a clear and unoccupied centre, and that can be realized through contemplative practice. This realization moderates the citta’s energies and radically affects the experience of being. There is pure presence. You can touched into this by sensing the ‘I’ that occurs in experience; the ‘I’ that has no ‘am’ is still, aware and unoccupied. The citta can touch a basis which doesn’t carry such signs as ‘arising’ or ‘ceasing’, ‘here’ or ‘there’; a resting on that is unconditioned, timeless, and has no sensation or feeling. Just as you can’t describe the balance in the body in terms of weight, movement, vitality or any other way in which we directly know our bodies, you can’t describe the Unconditioned in terms of ‘mind’ or ‘heart’. More realistically, it’s the absence of leaning and stress.

The way of expressing the entry into that unconditioned domain is through relinquishment, ripening into ‘release’ (vossagga). There can be a release from the imbalance that the citta adopts. This is what we’ve been working on through getting the body to organize around its own intelligence while sitting, standing, walking and breathing. We let go of views about the ‘right’, properly authorized Buddhist practice, and instead, we let the body and heart adjust and find the way to pure and steady presence.

Then as you feel and sense your way, be spacious and allowing in terms of the process. You’ll be aware of the citta’s confusion and discomfort, but by placing it in a safe, natural body, you’re taking the citta out of the reach of the biases and pressures of self-conceiving. Trust full embodiment. You can’t arrive at the right meditation by figuring things out, but, through careful embodied attention, goodwill and direct knowing, there can be freedom from the pressure of becoming and self-view. This is the environment that supports the realization of the Unconditioned.

If all this brings about a relinquishment of function, choice and belonging, is insight practice a recipe for dysfunction? No. The stable citta never fully absorbs into function, and never becomes a solid person; but it can be innovative rather than automatically functional, and it can be motivated and operate free of personal concern. It does so from the basis of the factors that brought around dispassion and relinquishment. Herein the Ānāpānasati Sutta specifically highlights the four establishments of mindfulness and the seven factors of awakening – which we’ll look into later. But in brief, the result is an engagement with life which at the same time is disengaged from the outflows and hindrances. The heart’s stability, dignity and reflective awareness are then revealed, and the capacity for goodwill, courage and patience blossoms. Citta remains open and shares itself wherever there is the occasion, but to an increasing extent it doesn’t lean away from its basis.

1. M.78:8