# 15 – Reflective Awareness

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to mind/heart.’

One trains: ‘breathe in deeply gladdening mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out deeply gladdening mind/heart.’

##### Instructions

Attune to the receptivity of heart. What (or where) is that which receives (or attends to) experience?

Lightly acknowledge the overall flow of your inner experience and step back a little. In other words, don’t get too interested in it; distance a little.

As you feel the spacious, or grounding, effects of that disengaged awareness, linger in it. Enjoy how it feels.

Attune to your breathing to maintain balance (if you feel flooded), feel grounded (if you feel over-energized), or get clear (if you feel foggy).

##### Sensitivity can be directed

Ideas of freedom and deep wisdom are attractive. But how do these experiences happen? Well, a way to realize these is through directly touching and gladly appreciating the citta, the third tetrad of the instructions on ānāpānasati.

This section of the teaching indicates that as the resonances and reverberations of cittasaṅkhāra get stilled, the meditator is more able to sense the citta as a sensitivity – that is, a reflective awareness. It’s apparent when you ask yourself: ‘How (or where) is experience received?’ ‘How do I know that experience happens?’ There’s a turn (we call it ‘inwards’) to the citta. It’s a knowing presence that peeks out in our calmer moments, beneath the self-image and personality. It’s also that which can be liberated.

In the suttas, the citta is the main focus for wellbeing, ethical clarity and liberation. ‘For a long time this citta has been defiled by lust, hatred, and delusion. Through the defilements of the citta beings are defiled; with the cleansing of the citta beings are purified.’ (S.22:100) Even more incisive and direct is the statement: ‘This is the deathless, namely, the liberation of citta through non-clinging.’ (M.106:13) Towards this end, citta can be ‘turned’, as in: ‘He turns his citta away from [the aggregates] and directs it towards the deathless element thus: “This is the peaceful, this is the sublime, that is, the stilling of all formation, the relinquishing of all attachments, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.”’ (M.64; A.9:36) So it can be turned – and directed – when it is collected: as in the case of the Buddha’s awakening: ‘When my concentrated citta was thus purified … I directed it to knowledge of the destruction of the taints.’ (M.4:31)

I’ve explained earlier how citta differs from manas; but as citta can be directed, it also differs from consciousness, viññāṇa, which is the passive recipient of sense-data. Citta is normally acts to direct mind-consciousness (mano-viññāṇa), both in terms of an object (‘look for that’) and in terms of ethics (‘be restrained’; ‘watch over your speech’). As the associated Pali word ‘cetanā’ (intention/inclination) suggests, citta takes a direction that refers to its living environment, and can follow that: it can aim for virtue or gratification, it can be impassioned, get interested, or reach out with kindness and compassion. So I call it the ‘heart’ of mental consciousness. And yet, citta is not a thing: one of the wrong views held by certain samaṇas and brahmins is that ‘what is called citta … is a self that is permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, the same for ever and ever.’ (D.1:2.13) But, as the Buddha remarked, ‘I do not see even one thing that changes so quickly as the citta.’ (A.1:48) So not a thing, and not a soul. We might liken the citta to the wind; it can turn, incline from stormy to balmy and tranquil – and from ignorance to clarity. And like the wind, it can drop. In less poetic terms, just as one can change one’s mind or lose interest in going to parties, the citta is a non-conceptual intelligence that can get interested – or turn away.

In samādhi, such reflective intelligence can be experienced as luminous and liberated from defiling influences (A.1:49-52). The heart is bright and radiant, ‘gladdened’ by resting in itself – although it doesn’t mean that citta is fully liberated yet.1 However, the citta’s reflective capacity is intelligent, and it can develop. More like a lake than a mirror, this reflective awareness can get stirred up by what appears in its domain, and give distorted reflections. But, to repeat the message, the water of the citta’s lake can be directed; this is the theme of this tetrad.

##### Brighten beyond the personal form

Ordinarily the citta’s domain is the turbulent world of perceptions and feelings born of mind-contact, in which case it is constantly resonating; those resonances (cittasaṅkhārā) become its location, and the weave of perceptions, feeling and activating energies, when affected by clinging, push and pull that citta into a tangle. With ignorance, the notion arises that this tangle is myself, or that I am stuck with all this, or there is a self I could be that stands apart from all this. All these impressions do not release the heart and don’t bring an end to stress. The meditative work then is to not adopt a notion, but to directly brighten and steady the reflective capacity and thereby undo the turmoil and tangle that clinging makes out of it.

For now, let’s focus on revealing the reflective sensitivity of citta and gladdening it. This gladdening is essential for feeding and strengthening the heart: a contented heart lets go more easily than a desperate or dejected one.

In this process, there’s a shift from deriving pleasure from sense-based feelings, ideas or memories, to a joy in the purity of the citta itself. This enjoyment lingers in the heart and encourages it to find happiness in itself and to disengage from and clear its cluttered library of memories and imaginings. We train to acknowledge that sensitivity of heart, independent of the impressions and signs that appear in its awareness. This entails attuning to this awareness and opening to the suffusive energy of its easeful state. On account of this, the citta begins to reflect on itself, rather than on the tangled web.

##### Practical Details

###### Sense how you really feel

Considering that the citta is sensitive and feels, it may sound strange if I say that it can take practice to know what the citta is feeling. This is because it’s sensitive! That is, the citta gets buried because its perceptions and feelings can trigger powerful or socially unacceptable emotions. Those that are linked to sense-contact set up the view of gain and loss, and the reaction of clinging. But the resonances and responses that are more poignant are generated through human contact and carry signs of loss, abuse, fear, worry and so on. In these cases, the numbing (or diverting) reflex is to shut the heart and suppress the reaction. The heart-mind may therefore be somewhat numb or closed. So in order to clear and enjoy the citta, we need to know the perception-based feeling mindfully outside of the tangle of the resultant emotional flood and reactive identity. Then that strand of the web can pass and an opening can occur.

The steady and safe environment of embodied meditation offers a basis from which we can attend to perceptions as they arise. We can learn to deal with that tendency to jump into pre-formulated perceptions and reactions when perceptions of ourselves or others arise. In fact, some of that formulated self-tangle is about avoiding painful perceptions, and some is about having something to hold on to. The sensitive tangle called ‘me’ has to be unwrapped carefully. Gladdening is an aspect of that.

First linger in the gently agreeable perceptions of breathing. Then, when random memories or images arise, place attention (as ‘What’s this?’), linger, and sense how they feel and what they do. Their net result is to create you: there’s the sense of being stirred, and then being activated, and of reacting to that (as in, ‘This means that, I am this, and now what? How am I seen? What should I do …? I should stop reacting …’, etc., etc.). When those activating energies, cittasaṅkhārā, arise, don’t close them down; instead, by referring to the breathing, just step back a little. Attune to that sense which can step back a tad. Notice the signs of stirring, blurring or grasping and turn back to the breathing’s energy. Settle in that embodied energy without continuing in the perception-feeling-activation cycle; let the activations and formations pass.

##### Know the knowing

Notice how you immediately know. Focus on the knowing itself, not on what you know. This immediate knowing is not about understanding what you’re experiencing. Direct citta-based knowing is non-conceptual. It’s just the reflective awareness that contact and impression are happening. This kind of knowing is behind everything that touches you, good or bad. That’s the citta. Get used to knowing the ordinary, the bright, the weird and the agitated. You can always return to this knowing; it just requires sustaining your embodied foundation, acknowledging the reactions, breathing through them and letting them pass. If you think you shouldn’t react so foolishly or compulsively (etc.), know those secondary reactions in the same way. If this gets confusing, then return to the embodied basis until you can steady through breathing – and let the confusion pass.

This is the way you reach through your afflictive perceptions and reactions and encourage the intelligence of the citta. Over time, this territory becomes more refined. You may feel centred, or have a sense of spaciousness, or feel bright and sensitive – these nimitta, or any quasi-sensual ones (radiance, softness and so on), may occur. Allow any of these to be there – but don’t go into them. This may bring around shifts in your embodied domain, and subtle bodily movements (a release in the shoulders or abdomen, for example). The ordinary experience of your body will change to a more centred and suffusive energy. Don’t go into the mind yet, but spread awareness over the breath-energy and the awareness of it. Enjoy and linger in that. Let the blended energy support and stabilize citta’s coming to the fore. This will allow the bright citta to grow firmer. As you get a sense of that, widen your awareness to include the heartful experience. You can refer to the suffusive feel of the breathing to support that widening. Be aware of that spaciousness and how you feel in that. This is gladdening.

1. Footnote: Other references seem to suggest that the luminosity is a refined manifestation that can disappear – as in: ‘With the cessation [nirodhā] of name-and-form there is the disappearance [atthaṅgamo] of citta.’ (S.47:42) It’s notable that the term ‘nirodhā’ isn’t replicated; and that the term ‘atthaṅgamo’ is normally applied to the sun as it sets. So whereas from the text one would expect the phrase ‘the cessation of citta’, a ‘sunset’ suggests that the citta’s energies aren’t manifesting in terms of nāma, but are not annihilated. Also there is the exclamation of the arahant Bhikkhuni Patacārā, who likens her citta’s release to the going out of a flame (Therīgāthā 5:10). These references suggest that the citta has an energetic potency, and this can switch off.