# 20 – Keep Breathing!

Here in synopsis are guidelines on mindfulness of breathing.

Trust embodiment.

Put aside the anatomical body in accordance with deepening.

Anchor energy within the breathing.

Use breathing to moderate the mind, not vice versa.

Hindrances are a major arena for learning to depersonalize.

Practice proceeds in accord with Dhamma; it’s the wholeness – whole-hearted, whole body, whole Path – that does the work.

##### 1 Trust embodiment

Embodiment doesn’t mean being attached to a physical form. What I mean by this term is: awareness centred in how the body feels and senses itself. As long as we ‘know’ our body from our mental and visual impression of it, we measure it in accordance with ideas of what it is and should be and make it into a person. The result of that is that we only have a very partial experience of our own body. This feels unbalanced and uncomfortable. An important aim of embodiment therefore is to re-educate the mind; to attune to direct experience and cultivate comfort through a full and sympathetic awareness of it. Then the body offers the lifelong reference to living reality – which is a good place to start if you’re interested in truth and awakening.

Also trust the timing of embodiment. The body itself doesn’t operate according to the clock, nor according to the mind’s wishes. Tune in to breathing at your body’s natural rate – which will change. Settling, opening and releasing occur in accordance with embodied awareness. Establishing safety and stability can take repeated occasions of focused practice. Release comes after that. Understanding comes later.

##### 2 Put aside the anatomical body in accordance with deepening

By ‘the anatomical body’ I mean the perceptual map of the body’s anatomy that we carry in our minds. This ‘virtual picture’ of the body doesn’t match what we directly feel, and it doesn’t support settling into, and harmonizing with, what is felt. The mental concept of the body sets up a map and a mode of attention that prevent energy and awareness from covering the entire body and addressing the imbalances that are a source of pain. For example, the way one stands can cause an imbalance that creates tension and pain in the shoulders, but, because from the anatomical viewpoint the shoulders are far from the feet, we don’t consider that changing the stance might allow the entire body to settle and the breathing to deepen – which would help the shoulders to relax. In terms of direct experience, everything is connected: bodily tension and imbalance are bound up with emotional and psychological stress; and the breath-energy is pivotal to physical and emotional wellbeing. We need to experience the body as it’s felt to really understand that.

Nevertheless, we begin with the anatomical body in order to establish posture and set up the body as a foundation for mindfulness. Then, when mindfulness is established within the body, we notice the body occupies a field of fluctuating sensations – the ‘sensation-field’ – and the contours and measures of the anatomical map become more charged. The sense of having a visual shape recedes and the body is experienced in terms of varying intensities of felt experience. This does relate to the anatomy, but the felt shape is different: for example, a sensitive place like the hand generates a fuller sensation-field than the entirety of your back does. Your attention is also drawn to uncomfortable sensations and in so doing, magnifies them. So this sensate body gets us in touch with what the heart gets bound up with, and with what it struggles. This is the Buddha’s First Noble Truth. And this encourages a careful and kindly response: be patient, don’t fight; your felt body can change if you widen your focus and soften your energy.

Dealing with this sentient body therefore requires us to acknowledge and handle bodily energies. This energy can be detected in terms of the vitality, tension, stability, agitation or stagnation experienced in the body. It is activated by sensations, and stirred by the physical and mental feelings that arise dependent on those sensations. (It’s also stirred by mental energies and supports mental states.) Imbalanced energy can make the body feel asymmetrical, top-heavy, ungrounded or flooded – but giving careful attention to energy offers a way to stability and ease. The field of bodily energy can be settled, consolidated, soothed and released from the sensation-field through breathing.

Although we can at a certain point put aside the anatomical perception, I do not advise dissociation. The proper process is to sense, establish and understand the boundaries of the anatomical body first. This focuses the mind. Then mindfulness of the field of sensations as it covers the anatomy takes the mind into the body as a sensitive system (rather than a lump of meat and bones). Meeting the feelings that run through the body then becomes a Dhamma practice that encourages awareness of the energies of body and mind that can moderate their impact. As these energies settle and consolidate, there is a foundation for samādhi and liberation. Yet we also have to integrate the energy and its purifying effects into how we regard and use the physical body when we leave samādhi. All this is why we bear the body in mind.

##### 3 Anchor energy within the breathing

This is the initial and ongoing function of mindfulness of breathing. Practise settling the body with grounding and spaciousness until breathing comes to the fore and extends through the body in an even and unrestricted way. Meet any agitation, imbalance or stagnation in this wide field through the grounding, spaciousness and rhythm of breathing. Give attention to the pause phase rather than focus on a point. A narrow focus can create an unfavourable intensity, a line of constrictive energy that may be captivating, but is brittle. When it breaks, the mind can get disoriented, irritable or worse. So anchor energy within ground, space and rhythm; don’t force it onto a point in the anatomy. It’s the energy, not the sensations, that liberates the citta.

##### 4 Use breathing to moderate the mind, not vice versa

This follows on from all of the above. Acknowledge, learn from and grow deeper than the meddling mind. This is about moderating intention and flexing attention to be receptive to the breathing; adjust the mind rather than direct the breathing.

We need to apply intention; it’s just that the kind of intention changes. At first we use ideas, aims and wishes to set up meditation. Then as we establish mindfulness, the conceiving mind has to be trained to follow the breathing through placing-and-sensing: think short, listen long. Wisely restrain the thinking mind in order to ‘listen’ more receptively within the meditative process.

We also train the emotional and impulsive energies of the citta. It’s good to be emotionally attuned and extend an attitude of goodwill to one’s body and mind in order to come out of abstract notions or mechanical techniques. Sensitivity and responsiveness are to be encouraged. As these deepen, they loosen reactivity, and abbreviate expectation or despond, so the citta attunes to equanimity. Equanimity and dispassion allow us to let go of impatient inclinations to get concentrated, to understand why we feel the way we do, to hang on to pleasure, or to get on to the next stage. Such fretfulness intrudes on the embodied process and hinders the impersonal unfolding of calm and insight. Instead, we train to acknowledge and steady the emotional aspect of the citta. In this way, the citta gets cleaner and clearer.

As the patterns of psychological and emotional tweaking are a template of the personality, putting these aside is an aspect of abandoning personality-view, the first fetter to awakening.

##### 5 Hindrances are a major arena for learning to depersonalize

This is a reminder to do all of the above. Taking irritability, sense-desire, dullness, restlessness or vacillating doubt personally will lead to despond. Grounding and moderating the mind will support the resources needed to clear the hindrances. Meanwhile, there is a learning to be done, both in terms of acknowledging the biases and conditioning that support hindrances, and in terms of realizing a more secure and easeful basis. If you take your cues from worldly values and signs, hindrances will arise conditioned by worldly glows, nagging pressures, performance drives and judgements. Taken personally, these programs steer and shape your life. On the other hand, if you wisely respond to their challenge, you’ll learn disengagement, magnanimity, and skills for handling attitude and energy. These skills and what they reveal become a reference to orient your life around that’s more reliable than any idea of what you are.

##### 6 Practice proceeds in accord with Dhamma; it’s the wholeness that does the work

This summarizes all of the above. Have faith in Dhamma. Practise in accord with what arises for you in terms of your acquired bodily and mental kamma. This is Dhamma practice. Through meditation you enter the weave of energies, skills and understanding that liberates. Mindfulness of breathing is a good meditation theme, but you should also cultivate the values and virtues of a supportive lifestyle. Ethics, giving and sharing, restraint and goodwill are the great Dhamma body that we breathe through – and it is the wisdom of this that takes the practice beyond what we can do from a personal basis.