# 4 – Right Mindfulness Needs Right View

Mindfully one abandons wrong view, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right view: this is one’s right mindfulness. Thus these three states run and circle around right view, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness

(M.117:9)

##### An awareness guided by right view

Before we go much further in exploring mindfulness of breathing, I thought to digress a little and look into the topic of mindfulness or sati. It’s a crucial factor because in order to steady the mind and benefit from the calm vitality of breathing, one needs to stay with it and ward off concerns about family and work, calculations of how long you have to sit … and so on. This ‘staying on topic’ is a function of mindfulness. With mindfulness, the mind doesn’t elaborate and it doesn’t go forward; there’s no ‘it could be this …’ or ‘… and next’. Mindfulness is described as the ability to bear something in mind, as in: ‘[One] has mindfulness; one possesses the highest mindfulness and skill; one recalls and recollects what was done and spoken of long ago.’ (M.53:16; S.48:9; S.48:50) So the establishment of mindfulness is a mental action that’s akin to throwing a loop around an experience in order to fully and receptively attend to it.

In terms of meditation practice, ‘right’ mindfulness is not just a matter of sustained attention, but is also attuned with regard to the suitability of what it settles on. This sensitivity is right view. As the Buddha pointed out: ‘Here, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is giving attention to some sign [i.e. ‘feature’ (nimitta)] and owing to that sign there arise in him evil, unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion, then he should give attention to some other sign connected with what is wholesome.’(M.20:2)

This is in accord with the nature of mind: what one sustains attention on forms the dominant input for the mind, so one has to train attention in terms of what one focuses on and with what intention. This is called ‘deep’ (or ‘careful’, or ‘appropriate’) attention (yoniso manasikāra). This kind of attention senses whether, for example, giving attention to something inflames or steadies the heart, or is too subtle for the mind to grasp.

The Buddha also referred to ‘wrong’ mindfulness and stated its consequences: ‘In a person of wrong view, wrong attitude comes into being. In a person of wrong attitude, wrong speech. In a person of wrong speech, wrong action. In a person of wrong action, wrong livelihood. In a person of wrong livelihood, wrong effort. In a person of wrong effort, wrong mindfulness. In a person of wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration. In a person of wrong concentration, wrong knowledge. In a person of wrong knowledge, wrong release.’(A.10:103)

So right and wrong view condition attitude and attention, the foundations of mindfulness. Whereas wrong view doesn’t give any significance to ethical uprightness, right view does the opposite: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions ….’ And so … ‘One makes an effort to abandon wrong view and to enter upon right view: this is one’s right effort. Mindfully one abandons wrong view, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right view: this is one’s right mindfulness.’ (M.117:9)

##### Attitude and effort

With right view, one recollects that what the mind engages with will have fortunate or unfortunate results; and this is also the case with reference to how one engages. Get forceful or reactive and you’ll foster impulsiveness or agitation; respond with care and sensitivity and you get clearer and more composed. However, if your focus is too tight, it restricts receptivity. Therefore attitudes and modes of attention and engagement that we may have picked up from work or from other people have to be acknowledged and adjusted in accord with careful attention.

As we consider right attitude, another point to bear in mind is that the establishment of mindfulness doesn’t mean that you can’t think. Mindfulness is associated with the ability to remember, that is, the capacity to distil the essence of an experience in order to dwell on it. This uses thinking in a reflective way – to arrive at a skilful meaning, rather than to proliferate and speculate. As the Buddha advised: ‘Whenever, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu dwelling thus withdrawn recollects that Dhamma and thinks it over, on that occasion the enlightenment factor of mindfulness is aroused by the bhikkhu; on that occasion the bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness ….’ (S.46:3)

There are many teachings that one can reflect on towards this end – such as the value of virtue, the self-respect that comes with sense-restraint, the freedom and happiness that come with the cultivation of goodwill, the mortality that makes our every day of life a precious gift … and the liberation potential of mindfulness of breathing. What these skilful themes have in common is that they deepen and enrich our perspectives, are guided by right view and right attitude, and are conducive to right effort.

‘When your virtue is well purified and your view straight, based upon virtue, established upon virtue, you should develop the four establishments of mindfulness ….’ (S.47:3; cf. S.47:15; S.47:47) The ‘rightness’ is that the mind is shielded from distraction, and collected on what is nourishing and fruitful.

It’s good to remember this twofold quality because although the mind can be as mischievous as a monkey and needs to be restrained, it can also be depleted – and so benefits from a focus on gladdening or steadying themes. As we come to realize, one reason that the mind is so erratic is because it’s hungry and confused – therefore it has to be fed. The kind of foods that are advocated aren’t sense-data, ideals and opinions, but calm energies, helpful considerations, and skilful attitudes. Getting these foods depends on establishing mindfulness based on right view.

With right view, we consider a more wholesome way of relating. This is with right attitude – an approach to meditation (and to life in general) that rules out forcefulness, insensitivity and sensory gratification. It may not be apparent that these tendencies are present until you enter the refined sphere of meditation – and you find yourself forcing the mind to follow the breath rather than attending to it carefully in order to find out what works. Either that or you grow impatient to get to the sweet stuff. Wrong view, wrong attitude, wrong effort. Instead, with right attitude we explore ways of encouraging and sustaining a steady energy: this inquiry is right effort. So you get the view straight first, then see what (if anything) is needed. Maybe you just need to slow down and attend more deeply; to let the steadiness of not pushing or distracting or calculating have its natural result. Or maybe you need to reflect wisely on how you’re using your time, and consequently firm up your intention.

Right effort develops out of view and attitude rather than out of blind willpower. It means you apply an attentive inquiry to your practice: you apply, you linger, you note the results, you’re willing to learn. Right view offers trust in the power of skilfulness; right attitude lays down some details of what is skilful; and then right effort can follow through on the attitudes and intentions with some pragmatic application. This careful attentiveness should be undertaken in terms of whatever one is involved with – whether this be a relationship with another person, a task, or establishing mindful receptivity to one’s breathing.

In outline, right effort is fourfold – to refrain from, and protect the heart from, the influence of hurtful, greedy or distracting phenomena; and to uplift and establish the heart in whatever is peaceful, wholesome and meaningful. It needn’t be a battle or a strain. If that’s what your effort is becoming, you should step back and reflect with deep attention. Ask yourself: ‘Where is the skilful factor, or theme or person that can help me get my direction straight?’ In this way, you ward off what is unskilful, contradictory or irrelevant, and kindle and sustain what is skilful and supportive.

Such right effort, as it matures into steady persistence, is the proximate condition for right mindfulness. It maintains the understanding of right view and the boundaries of appropriate attention. Properly maintained, such mindfulness, when established in the body, is regarded as invaluable: ‘… whoever develops and cultivates mindfulness immersed in the body includes all wholesome qualities that pertain to clear knowledge.’1(A.1:575) ‘Bhikkhus, they have not directly known the deathless who have not directly known mindfulness immersed in the body.’ (A.1:625) So, by holding a mirror to your attitudes, how you engage and the consequences, mindfulness opens the door to awakening.

As for closing the door against harmful influences – in M.119 the Buddha likens mindfulness immersed in the body to a door-panel made of heartwood: just as throwing a ball of string at such a panel will not open the door, so any attempts by Mara (the force of ignorance and corruption) will not get into the mind of someone who has developed mindfulness of body. But the same discourse also alludes to the agility consequent upon such a training: ‘when one has developed and cultivated mindfulness immersed in the body, one has the ability to witness any state that can be realized by supreme knowledge to which one inclines the mind.’ (M.119:29) This ability to witness is alluded to (in the fourth tetrad of ānāpānasati) as a consummate skill. It stems from mindfulness.

##### Mindfulness and concentration

Based on right view and right effort, mindfulness brings forth sensitivity and firmness whereby attitudes and impulses are reviewed, supportive ones are encouraged, and hindrances starved. Consequently, the mind is settled in its purity. It is steady and has a unified intent. This is how mindfulness supports concentration.

In terms of the details of what we apply mindfulness to, the teachings encourage us to begin with mindfulness of body in the postures of sitting, standing, walking and reclining. Even within these simple frames of reference, things may get tricky because of wrong view. That is, the mind can be relating to life, mind and body in accord with the materialist view of much of our culture: i.e. that the thinking mind is in charge, it plans and organizes, and that the body is a passive vehicle for that mind. At best, it’s a pedigree donkey, so feed it, bathe it, dress it and make it work. The unskilful results of that view become apparent when the mind ignores or blocks the body’s natural way of sensing, and tries to get focused by recording sensations. Through this approach, meditation gets off on a wrong footing, because it’s based on what the mind considers breathing to be, rather than attending to how the body itself senses its breathing.

So how does the body know it’s breathing? In one analogy, the Buddha likened mindfulness immersed in the body to a post to which six wild animals are tethered so that they don’t tug and pull in different directions. In this analogy, the six animals are the six senses (including that of touch and of the thinking mind).2 These pull awareness out into diverse sensory phenomena, where it loses its stability. So we are encouraged to establish mindfulness on an aspect of the body that is not linked to tactile impressions. This is the inner body/nervous system with its sensitivity. Consequently, it follows that we should attune to breathing not as a series of sensations, but as an energy that affects the nervous system. As the teachings make clear, this is a source of refined and nourishing pleasure.

Because of this feedback of pleasure, the meditator is encouraged to attend to the body as a feeling-sensitive system. This is the result of regarding the body with right view. Based on that, and with mindfulness and appropriate effort, agitation, stress and fatigue can be cleared. You can sense where and with what attitude a quality of gladness or ease arises. And through immersing your awareness in a calm and easeful body, you discern the attitudes that cause and sustain tension. You notice what makes you compulsive or operate on automatic pilot, and when you’re missing the point and getting stale and bored. Accordingly, you find a way to apply yourself that has been educated by goodwill, sensitivity and restraint. Then the results can only be for the good: ‘When one thus dwells diligently, gladness is born. When one is gladdened, rapture is born. When the mind is uplifted by rapture, the body becomes tranquil. One tranquil in body experiences happiness. The mind of one who is happy becomes concentrated. When the mind is concentrated, phenomena become manifest. Because phenomena become manifest, one is reckoned as “one who dwells diligently”’ (S.55:40)

1. The phrase ‘immersed in’ (kāyagatā) seems to indicate a depth of access – i.e. not just aware of the physical aspects, but of the sensitivities of the inner body.

2. S.35:247