# 12 – Emotional Equilibrium

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to mental formation’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to mental formation.’

One trains: ‘breathe in calming mental formation’; one trains: ‘breathe out calming mental formation.’

##### Instructions

Give attention to the sensitivity of heart; extend your awareness from how you feel to the more fundamental experience of being sensitive.

In that focal range, define your general mood or mode of feeling at this time in simple terms – such as ‘settled’ or ‘eager’ or ‘intense’ or ‘open’. If you’re not clear on that, acknowledge what you’re not feeling – such as ‘I don’t feel clear’ (or ‘happy,’ etc.).

Even if you can’t find words that fit, explore the domain of heart, and spread awareness over it in a way that is spacious and brings calm.

##### Mental formation shapes you

These two terse phrases in the sutta sketch out the process of sensitizing and calming the mental formation (cittasaṅkhāra). And what is that mental formation? In the suttas, cittasaṅkhāra is described in two ways: as perception and feeling, and as the heart’s ‘volitional formation’. If those experiences are explored, we get the sense that perception (i.e. meaning, impression, my ‘take’ on what’s happening), and the agreeable, disagreeable or neutral feeling that goes along with that, make the heart hard or relaxed, etc. That making is the ‘mental formation’. It also steers our responses, aka the ‘volitional formation’. Put more simply – how experience is received and responded to condition the state of mind. And that affects how we act. Affect and response: these are the two aspects of cittasaṅkhāra. They determine how I act.

You may also notice, when you get psychologically affected or emotionally moved, that the heart takes on a corresponding ‘shape’ – such as open-heartedness, or narrow-mindedness. This ‘being shaped’ – and the most habitual heart-shapes – become a fundamental aspect of who I seem to be. But how true is that?

Bear in mind that the programs that cittasaṅkhāra establishes are the moods, tendencies, and attitudes that you seem to be – so you can’t explore them by means of who you normally seem to be (aka ‘the person’). However, with training, awareness can access a level of mind that is not ‘who I normally seem to be’ and work on those formations. This is because ‘I am’ is a construction, not a final reality, and the aware citta can step out of that.

##### Stepping out of self-view

We are from time to time not always who we seem to be – and that allows us to grow out of old habits and find new directions. Sometimes the shift out of the old norm can be dramatic and wonderful – as with mystical experiences, or a psychological breakthrough. It can also take unskilful forms – as when the mind is entranced, intoxicated, or has any one of the minor and major lapses that give rise to expressions such as: ‘I wasn’t feeling like myself; what came over me?’ Or, ‘He wasn’t responsible for his actions.’ In Buddhist parlance, what this means is that unawakened and unskilful saṅkhārā arose and the ‘I am’ construction (ahaṃkāra) made a self out of them.

In mind-training in general, this variable formation of citta – with its potential to get triggered, rise up, feel crushed or fall apart – is what we’re dealing with. In meditation, it becomes possible to sense this conditioning force and calm the impulses that issue from it. You can mature out of needing to be some fixed identity; you can be free of that reflex to seize on any formation or attitude as ‘this is what I am’. For this, you operate in the atmosphere of skilful mental pleasure, because the pleasant feeling born of disengagement causes the mind to shift its attention away from the erratic swings of emotions and feeling based on sight, sound, touch, thought and the rest. Steadied by disengagement, the citta has an open energy that settles and loosens the contracted state and consolidates into a sense of steady presence. With that, many actions and reactions come to rest, and the basis of cittasaṅkhāra, the sensitivity of the heart, is revealed. Then you can calm and appreciate it. Worth looking into, don’t you think?

##### Practical Details

###### Helpful signs

To recap, the line of practice is first to disengage from the whirl of distractive thoughts and negative emotions: this supports an open awareness. The subsequent skill is to linger in that state and take in how your body and breathing feel; and by so doing, deepen that pleasure into a firm foundation. As I’ve described earlier, the process of doing this will proceed by clearing hindrances and moderating unbalanced energy. To the extent to which this is fulfilled, the bodily and mental energies settle and there is rapture – a skilful saṅkhāra – and ease – a feeling not based on sense-contact, but rather on the release from that. In this mode, one is liable to experience non-sensory impressions or ‘signs’ (nimittā), such as brightness or spaciousness.

Nimitta (plural: nimittā), what it means and what it signifies, can be a charged topic. The Theravada commentarial tradition, whose understanding is consolidated in the 5th century meditation manual, Visuddhimagga, refers to cultivating nimittā of progressive degrees of subtlety. This leads to the appearance of a quasi-visual bead of light in the mind. In the meditation approach mentioned in that text, this is a crucial step in developing samādhi. However, there is no apparent reference to this in the suttas. These discourses do refer to nimittā, and hold them to be important, but in this context the term has a broader connotation, as I’ve illustrated in the quotes so far. As we’ve seen, one discourse (M.44:12) has it that the nimittā of samādhi are the four establishments of mindfulness. Another discourse (M.43:37) mentions greed, hatred and delusion as makers of nimittā. There are other instances in which the term appears in the context of meditation practice: one is in the simile of the cook that I alluded to earlier (S.47:8), in which the difference between the wise and the foolish cooks is that the wise one notices the ‘sign’ that his master enjoys certain foods more than others. This is likened to the skilful meditator who notices the felt impression that arises in the citta as it picks up an aspect of the meditation theme that supports its concentration and release – this impression is the nimitta.

So I suggest that the meaning of the word ‘nimitta’ changed through the 1,000-year gap between the life of the Buddha and the Visuddhimagga. Most likely, if you use the mind like an eye, in line with the Visuddhimagga’s style of practice, you’ll get a visual sign. But it’s also the case that if you use it like an ear, it will produce an auditory sign – whereas if it operates as if it’s touching, it will produce a sign of soft warmth. And some people’s minds aren’t that expressive. I would say that any characteristic that you notice as your mind steadies and deepens – it may feel more spacious, or buoyant, or bright – can be a useful nimitta. One benefit is that you get to know and trust your mind when its heart isn’t bound up in tension, turbulence, numbness or other such unskilful nimittā. Then, when these unskilful signs are disbanded, one should notice that and enjoy it. There may, for example, be perceptions of space or coolness or light or comfort. These can be fascinating – but the Buddha doesn’t encourage fascination. Instead, he calls attention to the skilful effect that these perceptions can have: they calm, rather than intensify, the sensitivity of the heart.

However, as the citta steps back from sense-contact, there is the risk of getting fascinated by unusual signs – such as dramatic shifts of energy, or lights – to the point of imbalance. Energy, bright or distorted, attracts attention. And it can throw the mind into obsessive or ecstatic states. Thus there is the need to stabilize energy by maintaining awareness of the breathing body – and also by shifting one’s attention back a little as if moving from the detail of a painting to seeing the whole picture. Other than that, an attitude of restraint, and a lingering in the effect of cooling, are appropriate.

Don’t get too excited by a feeling – although when the pleasure born of meditation does arise, it’s naturally enjoyable. The mind needs to learn to enjoy, without grasping or asking for more. And here the Buddha makes it clear: it’s not pleasure that’s the problem; in fact, one kind of pleasure is part of the process. It’s just that any fascination and grasping associated with pleasure hinders liberation. And the really important aspect of skilful pleasant feeling is that it causes negative or habitual saṅkhārā to decline. If your mind gets shaped into grasping and indulging, and if your heart is taken over by wanting more and holding on, then it’s the wrong formation.

As distractions and hindrances abate, there is an enrichment of pīti-sukha. With this, the inhalations and exhalations become subtler and merge into the pause phase. The open energy of the pauses infuses the citta, which becomes richer and fuller. The form that it takes becomes wide and gently radiant, with soft boundaries.

From that basis one can inquire into and read the heart-sensitivity of cittasankhāra. Give attention to the shape and ‘body’ of this mental formation: it should be even, grounded and uncompressed. It won’t be elated and excited, or driving anywhere. If it’s in a solidly wholesome state, its energies will be at ease; then sensory pleasure and ideas have no attraction. And although this experience is intimate, it’s not personal. So rapture and ease offer a transformation of basis – one not based on one’s habitual social personality. This allows the behaviour of citta to be experienced with dispassion rather than fascination. It also allows the citta to unwrap and be sensed as clear presence – as the ensuing instructions describe.