# 17 – Liberating the Heart

One trains: ‘breathe in steadying mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out steadying mind/heart.’

One trains: ‘breathe in releasing mind/heart’; one trains: ‘breathe out releasing mind/heart.’

##### Instructions

Attune to the sense of knowing – in terms of both awareness and a stable, open energy.

Whatever the impressions that arise, don’t adopt them, and don’t reject them. In all cases, sustain the open energy of restful awareness.

As inclinations to form a conclusion or to develop something arise, refer to that awareness and let these inclinations pass.

##### A basis in gladdening

The gladdening of the citta is more than pleasant: it gives assurance that states of feeling just about OK, or mindsets that assume you can’t go very far in meditation practice, are not a final reality. Actually, the ‘getting by/managing’ mindset is a constricted state of awareness, but this program does get normalized as the base for identity. Here the teaching is that the heart can move out of that and open into an unrestricted clarity.

The training so far streamlines and enriches the citta. Absorbing the steady stream of embodied energy nourishes and soothes mind and heart. As the citta’s non-conceptual awareness is thus increasingly strengthened and brought to the fore, it is relieved of the ragged energy of personal preoccupations; instead, its energy and the energy of the body blend. This collected energy feels open and unrestricted, but isn’t invaded by hindrances. It allows the citta to settle into its unoccupied state, and thereby serves as the most secure foundation for liberation.

Furthermore, on account of this meditative process, dispassion arises regarding the aggregates. One learns to witness one’s perceptions and mental impulses, incline to alternative experiences such as lingering in the whole body, and feel the more compulsive material die down. As this compulsive material comprises one’s habitual world and one’s apparent self, the experience of letting that apparent reality arise and pass is profoundly transformative.

As a meditator knows, the old realities do get to look pretty shaky, but there’s no need to panic. Awareness can stay steady with regard to the experiences of change and not-self. A trained citta feels stable. It’s not a solid object, but it has a stable, if fluid, presence. This is subjective, so it’s not something that your attention can form as an object: but you can notice how your citta as presence is affected and consequently adopts subtle forms. And you can notice what appears in its domain and what doesn’t: ‘Here a bhikkhu directly knows citta affected by lust as citta affected by lust, and citta unaffected by lust as citta unaffected by lust … affected … unaffected by hate … contracted citta as contracted citta, and distracted citta as distracted citta …. They directly know concentrated citta … and unconcentrated citta …. directly know liberated citta as liberated citta… and unliberated citta as unliberated citta.’ (M.10:34) This direct knowing lifts the citta away from what it’s affected by without denial, critique, acclaim or ignorance. Not much self here.

##### Thoughtless intelligence

How can citta directly ‘know’ itself? Because of its intelligence. We are so used to limiting intelligence to the domain of concepts and abstractions that we don’t give full recognition to an intelligence that doesn’t need to translate experience into concepts in order to gain understanding. The obvious example of such non-conceptual intelligence is bodily intelligence. Through this, the body knows how to balance and walk. It also has emergency reflexes. All of these require non-conceptual assessment and response. Bodily intelligence can run on semi-automatic in prescribed and habitual situations (as in walking from one room to another in one’s dwelling), but if one is walking through a wilderness at night, it has to be wakeful.

Citta has a similar intelligence: on account of this, a person will flush with shame at the awareness of their unskilful deeds; recoil from the prospect of lashing out and abusing; feel a surge of compassion at the plight of others; experience resolve when meeting a challenge – and so on. It’s not the case that we have to mentally ‘translate’ the shivering and whining of a dog into a clinical analysis and then decide to respond with compassion. There is a natural movement, a turning that the citta does by itself. It is both aware and responsive – depending on its degree of wakefulness. Notions of what to do may well arise a moment or two later as that compassionate interest gets the manas faculty to scan one’s internal ‘library’ for an appropriate line of action. In this way, skilful actions involve an interplay between the intelligences of heart, mind and body.

However, if our conceptual library is full of fiction, this overload may obscure a deeper and fuller citta response. We can be so eager to arrive at a conclusion that we can’t linger and wait for the citta to rise up, or steady itself, or turn away. Instead, we rush in and panic in order to get things right; or we condemn our unskilful instincts or shortcomings with a flood of critical and wounding thoughts. Or we don’t extend heartful awareness to other creatures. All of these shape, misshape and cover the citta. The meditative training then is to bring citta more fully to the fore, reveal it, steady it, nourish it – and trust the signs and tonal shifts that are its wise responses. This is how direct knowing works. With this we find our citta turning away from unskilful drives and instincts without a lot of thought and judgement. By not creating a scanner and a librarian, it also significantly lessens the sense of ‘I am’.

Although understanding that one’s citta is affected by lust or hatred doesn’t seem that liberating, as is often the case with the Buddha’s expositions, a sequential process begins with easily accessible experience and then develops out of that. Of course, it’s not always the case that people inflamed with hatred even ‘know’ it in the way of direct knowing: they blame their mood on someone else, or call it ‘firmness’. Direct knowing, however, is deeper and cooler than an intellectual assessment or emotional justification; it brings with it a disengagement from activating the perceptions, mental feeling and activating energies that would normally make an ‘I am’ out of the citta’s forms and states. This brings insight and supports liberation.

##### The power of presence

The open energy state, or pure presence, is to be given attention so that by being steadied, the citta doesn’t run out into sensuality. The outflow of becoming (bhav’āsava), which brings with it the sense of ‘I will be’, ‘I was’ and ‘I am’, can be experienced as pressure pushing the citta; by maintaining pure presence, that can cease. Similarly, the sense of having to do something, get something or know something can be sensed as conditioned impulses arising within the open, stable citta. Thus, by directly knowing – without engaging, narrowing or agitating – citta feels bright; its form is spacious and timeless. The atmosphere of the personality is thinned or absent.

The Buddha referred to such samādhi as ‘the best base of clinging’; it provides a place of rest and an opportunity for the citta to reset its aims and values. From this basis, there can be a turning that gives liberating results. ‘And what is the development of concentration that, when cultivated and grown, leads to the ending of the āsavā? There is the case where a bhikkhu remains focused on arising and subsiding with reference to the five aggregates: “Such is form, such its arising [samudāya], such its disappearance [atthaṅgamo]. Such is feeling …. Such is perception …. Such are formations …. Such is consciousness, such its arising, such its disappearance.” This is the development of concentration that, when cultivated and grown, leads to the ending of the āsavā.’ (A.4:41)

##### Practical Details

###### Resolve and release

Use placing-and-sensing to refer to what the citta is experiencing in a non-conceptual way. Signs of brightness or emptiness that attract or repel the heart may arise; cut off their movement into thoughts. Feel their energetic effect on the weave of the citta, but don’t adopt any impressions. Instead, spread awareness over the weave and let the citta release those subtle signs. Get interested in the alert stillness; attune to that quiet ‘no position’. Placing-and-sensing can fall away as the citta returns to its basis. Awareness feels open, but with a focus on that steady openness, citta is not invaded. It feels strong and light at the same time. This focus is like resting; it doesn’t hold tight, but it is bright.

Can you resolve to take a break from knowing anything, while remaining wakeful and calm?

It’s likely that inclinations to find a superior state of mind, or to claim one, will arise. Feel how they affect the openness, and how the citta consequently acquires a variable form. The open energy that was first detected in the long pause between the breaths, then sensed as the foundation for calm, will be a helpful reference. So, abandoning time boundaries and softening energetic contraction, firm up awareness with the aim of relinquishment. It will widen beyond boundaries. Settle into knowing.

From time to time there may arise a reflex to form a centre within that continuum of awareness. You may also sense it as an inclination to get busy, formulate an idea or somehow nail things down. This is the ‘thirst for becoming’ (bhava-taṇhā); be the knowing of that. Keep awareness open to its peripheries, making it evenly spread. The accompanying tone is equanimity rather than rapture.

When the citta is collecting itself in samādhi, there may be an imbalance in terms of rapture. If this factor is over-intense, withdraw attention a little, so that one is less emotionally engaged. Note the unsteady fluctuations of rapture and allow a sense of disenchantment (nibbidā) to arise. This brings around a cool timelessness and a release from the restricting influence of the aggregates, notably from perceptions and saṅkhāra.