# 13 – The Web, the Weave and the Way

Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, leads to such great good as the citta. The citta, when tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, leads to great good.

(A.1:40)

##### At the heart of a changing web

The Buddha realized that experience, whether it’s sensorial, psychological or meditative, is an ever-shifting and interactive play of conditioned forces and forms. The clarity of his awareness enabled him to see through this play and thereby quell the energies that give rise to the experience of being someone embedded in a highly insecure world. This scenario brings with it the pressure to arrange sights, sounds, events and other people according to the wishes of that self: I want things to be my way. Not only is this state of affairs unlikely to happen (therefore bringing dissatisfaction), but also the attempt to control life is stressful and can give rise to selfish, even brutal, actions. Suffering and stress (dukkha) follow the fixed self.

So penetrating this web and deconstructing the self that is stuck in it is what awakening is about. As the terminology that the Buddha used is tailored to reveal and undo the weave of that web, I thought to dedicate some space to explaining it. These language tools take time to learn how to apply, but, as they were used by the Buddha, it’s worth the effort. Bear with me for a while!

Firstly, manifest experience is conditioned (saṅkhata). That means the existence of things is conditioned by the kind of consciousness in which it arises. An example of this would be that we don’t see what butterflies do, as we have no infrared vision, so our perception of flowers is different to theirs. Our sense of smell is meagre compared with that of a dog, so a dog’s experience of Toronto or Glasgow will be compounded out of odours that have little effect on us rather than from displays in shop windows or grand porticos. The kind of consciousness we have therefore shapes our experience; significantly, it adds qualifiers of how pleasurable or important an object is.

##### The strands of the web

Fundamental to how experience happens is the weave of consciousness (viññāṇa) and some object (form, rūpa) to be conscious of. In this weave, the sensory base of consciousness affects how we experience an object. Seeing an apple is nothing like tasting one. Furthermore, the condition of any individual’s sense-consciousness is significantly variable: for example, for someone with a hearing disorder, the note ‘B flat’ may not be a discernible experience. So, even though we rely upon and base our preferences on them, the sense-organs and their data (collectively called ‘the sixfold sense-sphere’ – salāyatana) are partial and unreliable conveyors of truth. Mind-consciousness alone has many levels – from mystic absorption to drunken stupor – which all present reality in different ways. Notice also that in meditation one can turn away from the sense-spheres to a greater or lesser degree: therefore seeing, hearing, touching, thinking and so on are not permanent features of reality. So another qualifier is what you attend to and how – attention (manasikāra) is a significant condition.

Another important factor is felt meaning or perception (saññā): how things appear depends on a flow of felt meanings such as ‘beautiful’, ‘polite’, ‘important’. What is a laptop computer to a polar bear? Or to an Amazonian forest-dweller? And what are the rich array of plants that she or he knows so well to an urban European? So, perception is also conditioned. And it depends on the condition of repeatedly giving attention to an object until a meaning is learned. This is because perception is an important condition: we operate through knowing what a credit card or a calendar is – apart from being a flat, rectangular shape. Even more significant: what is your perception of other people? Or of yourself? What feelings and responses do these perceptions give rise to? Do perceptions get overwhelming? Again, meditative training gives you a handle on this – you can put aside to some degree or another perceptions of your body, your role, past events and other people. In brief: the citta can disengage. How does that feel?

Feeling (vedanā), the agreeable or disagreeable tone that accompanies experience, is another conditioning factor. We notice and are moved by what we feel; and we steer our lives around pleasure and pain. Obviously, pleasure attracts us, but there is also a compulsive labelling of sounds, sights, and events as being ‘unpleasant’ simply because we don’t favour them. When does a sound become a ‘noise’? Or a taste become ‘disgusting’? Or a lecture become ‘boring’? The dominant determinant of how things feel is one’s taste or preference. That preference is conditioned – by custom, mood, and so on. Yet it becomes embedded by being encoded, that is, by impression or contact (phassa).

Of course, contact is also conditioned by other senses – something strikes the ear or grabs the eye – but it’s the mental impression that jumps into your heart and sticks a felt meaning onto sense-impact. Consequently, you get reactive. This is why meditation teaches you to step back from contact and mental impressions. You both learn to moderate how you make contact (with your breathing, for example); and also to stay steadily focused through the flow of impressions and feelings that arise. Over time, as sense-contact is moderated, you experience heart-qualities such as quiet joy, stillness or spaciousness that give rise to subtle pleasure. This softens the impact that the citta experiences: the difference between handling sensual and heart-based feeling is like the difference between ducking and lunging in a boxing ring, and steering a boat through increasingly calm water. Moreover, as you learn to hold the mind steady in meditation, feeling loses its push and pull.

The push-and-pull aspect of experience is more fully taken up by a factor variously called ‘intention’, ‘impulse’, ‘inclination’, or ‘volition’ (cetanā). This is the moment-at-a-time driver of the mind, as well as its long-term trajectory – and it conditions what we attend to. Generally intention is set to respond to sense-contact dependent on the pleasure/pain, threat, or urgency that it triggers. So intention gets us to focus on what perceptions and impressions move us most. And these perceptions and feelings trigger further volitional energies. That’s how form comes alive in consciousness: contact, perception and feeling activate intentions. We hear a bleep or see a waving flag, interpret, and react.

You may remember this nāma-rūpa-viññāṇa weave from 9 Insight: Embodied Freedom. There is, however, another twist in the mesh that bears on the text and practice we’re exploring. It’s the sub-vortex in the web – that is, the interplay between attention, contact and intention. This is summarized as ‘formation’ (saṅkhāra). And in another analysis, the Buddha summed up form, feeling, perception, formations and consciousness as a conglomerate called ‘aggregates’ (khandhā).

As I said before, the pragmatic significance of all this is the fact that these weaves give rise to the sense of a solid person at the heart of experience, a self bound up in a tangle of unstable conditions. And that through Dhamma practice the heart-impressions and the self who is created by them can cease – if we work on the saṅkhāra threads of attention and intention. Then instead of there being a person stuck in the web of conditions, there’s a liberated citta.

##### The way to a true centre

Let’s look into that. For a start, the web is not rock-solid. Even without training, we learn to not react to the sound of traffic or the bleeps that various navigation systems make. But with training in terms of grounding the mind, cultivating careful attention and moderating intention, you can open the weave of the web. That is, when you lessen the intensity of your engagement with the sensory world, especially with the mental sense, you experience what I’ll call ‘heart-realities’ such as ethical orientation, benevolence and calm. Through meditation you learn how to steady and relax the ‘inner body’ with its energies. All this reduces the intensity of sense-contact and ensuing reactivity. Of course, you may well experience some old embedded patterns – such as restlessness, anxiety and turbulence – but when you’re coming from the heart, you can disengage and moderate that. Putting aside short-term interest and attending to the long-lasting improvement of the heart and mind, you can derive beneficial psychological (and physiological) results, results that feel good.

We therefore realize that citta – heart-based awareness – is intrinsic to our being, and it has the capacity to turn. It can disengage from our habitual angles on, and formulations of, experience, and incline to more meaningful ones. But it needs support, and this is what meditation can offer. Furthermore, meditation practice strengthens and refines the citta so that we can witness the weave of ‘me’ – that flow of ideas and moods – as a program, not a self.

Of primary importance in this way of release are the factors of intention/inclination and attention/focus. These are your tools, and they have immediate effects in the domains of the body and heart: narrow attention tends to sharpen and contract the body and heart, while a broader focus eases them. Different qualities of intention tighten or open these domains. So intention and attention have to be wisely balanced so that the citta can open and bring its skilful aspects to the fore rather than get flooded or distract itself. Then you feel a release from the pressure of the personal world and the web that is its home.

##### Outflows and tendencies

What draws the citta into this uncomfortable web? The Buddha pointed to a group of reflexes called ‘outflows’, ‘taints’, or ‘corruptions’ (āsavā) as being prime agents. These are experienced as three sets of impulses, or compulsive inclinations: towards sense-contact (kām’āsava), towards continuity, being or becoming (bhav’āsava), and towards ignorance, confusion or distraction (avijj’āsava). These references may seem either remote (‘What are you talking about?’) – or not a problem (‘Of course, I live in a sense-world, of course I am someone moving from past to future, of course I like to have a few hobbies and entertainments: what’s the problem with that?’). Well, that scenario doesn’t prepare you for ageing, sickness and death, or for separation from sights, sounds and contact that you enjoy. And these will happen. Isn’t that a problem? Moreover, the suffering and stress that is bound up with these outflows is avoidable. That was the Buddha’s life-project, and subsequently the thrust of his teaching.

’When my concentrated citta was thus purified … I directed it to knowledge of the destruction of the āsavā. I directly knew as it actually is: “This is suffering”; … “This is the origin of suffering”; … “This is the cessation of suffering”; … “This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering”; … “These are the āsavā”; … “This is the origin of the āsavā”; … “This is the cessation of the āsavā”; … “This is the way leading to the cessation of the āsavā.”

When I knew and saw thus, my citta was liberated from the āsavā… When it was liberated there came the knowledge: “It is liberated.” I directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”’ (M.4; M.19; M.36)

So once you’ve directly known the conditioned nature of what binds the heart, you’re encouraged to distinguish the citta in the context of, but distinct from, these factors. This entails investigation of the weave of the aggregates and how they get stuck in the outflows.

What you may realize is that, in a way that can be likened to the flaring up of bouts of a chronic disease, the outflows well up from underlying proclivities called ‘latent tendencies’ (anusaya) such as (the tendency to) sense-desire, irritability/grudges, views and opinions, speculative doubt, conceiving self and other, craving for continuity and becoming, and ignorance (A.7:11,12). They are not always apparent but support more obvious obstacles: for example, there is the tendency to cling to views – and that supports the hindrance of ill-will. Although we may not be experiencing ill-will when people agree with us and when we have no painful memories, what happens if these conditions change? As meditators come to know, when on an isolated and supported retreat, the mind can feel contented, blissful and benevolent – and yet the real test comes on returning to the workplace or family situation. Yes, the tendencies may be subdued in the calm of samādhi, but they are only eliminated through insight into the web. And through challenging our beliefs and attachments. It takes a firm and rightly-centred citta to withstand such influences – along with the wisdom to reveal them as inadequate and impersonal programs. But when the woven web of conditions is recognized as being contracted, changeable, and not intrinsic to the heart, disenchantment (nibbidā) occurs. The citta stands apart from the web, and opens to freedom.

Admittedly, the above is a brief summary, but even a more detailed explanation doesn’t bring liberation. So, keeping this sketch of conditioned reality somewhere in mind, let’s continue the practice.