# 7 – Training the Mind with the Body

One trains: ‘breathe in fully and completely sensitive to the entire body’; one trains: ‘breathe out fully and completely sensitive to the entire body.’

One trains: ‘breathe in calming bodily formation’; one trains: ‘breathe out calming bodily formation.’

##### Instructions

Focus on the rhythmic process and energy of breathing. As the mind settles into that, maintain mindfulness so that discursive and afflictive thoughts subside.

As moments of embodied, open and receptive awareness become apparent, linger in them, so that body and mind ‘learn’ this experience.

Bring that quality to bear on the body as an entirety, with the breathing acting as a steady moderator of the mind. Let the breath-flow carry your awareness.

Give full attention to the pauses and let your heart dwell on the emotional tones of release – relaxing at the end of the out-breath and brightening at the end of the in-breath.

When the body feels open and alive, scan slowly through it, detecting any imbalances and tense places. Bring your embodied and receptive awareness to bear on them, without trying to change or understand anything.

##### The bodily formation

For the forest-dwelling contemplatives of the Buddha’s time – who often lived in seclusion and were distanced from social appearance – the visual perception of the body was not that relevant. Such a person would directly ‘know’ the body through how it felt and how its living qualities arose. Also, the intelligence of the body was essential in order to navigate with full awareness through the uncertainties of natural, irregular and unlit territory that was shared with wild animals and outlaws.

Within this embodied domain, breathing is an essential centring medium, connected as it is to emotions and to bodily vitality. Although other sensations and energies come and go in accord with circumstances, breathing is the ongoing life force that brings the individual into an embodied form. It’s also that which can be immediately felt forming the experience of body as it gets aroused, strengthens, becomes agitated or relaxes. The bodily experience of breathing in and out is then rightly referred to as an active, formative process, kāyasaṅkhāra – ‘bodily formation’. And as it gets calmed, it supports subtle and sensitive mind-states.

This soothing and steadying of the kāyasaṅkhāra is given further significance in the discourses by instructions on it being connected to unskilful actions – one’s own or those initiated by others: ‘Either on one’s own initiative, Ᾱnanda … or prompted by others, one generates that bodily/verbal/mental saṅkhāra conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise internally. Either deliberately, Ānanda … or undeliberately, one generates that bodily/verbal/mental saṅkhāra conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise internally.’ (S.12:25)

This is evidenced by the aroused bodily energy that we might experience amongst a crowd of angry people or when our heart gets stirred into consumer thirst through advertising. There’s also the agitated nervous energy that accompanies restlessness, the flaring of passion or the clogged and stagnant bodily sense that accompanies despond. So kāyasaṅkhāra is not just the breathing, but more broadly speaking, embodied energy, and in particular the weave or patterns that it forms – such as hyper or hypo – dependent on states of mind. These patterns can become fixed, as in the case of oversensitivity or depression, or when one is acting compulsively. Such behaviour patterns are a breeding ground for the hindrances of sense-desire, ill-will, lethargy, restlessness and doubt. These hindrances cannot be released through intellectual understanding or mental willpower alone; one has to work on kāyasaṅkhāra. However, when the breathing channels and steadies kāyasaṅkhāra, it brightens and calms the entire body. Then there’s not much room for hindrances.

##### Reset around receptivity

Attuning to how the body regulates its breathing involves resetting how the mind operates. As if reading a pulse with your fingers, your training is to be sensitive, open and restrained while ‘listening’ to the energy system that runs through the entire body and is bound up with the mind. This receptivity can be refined with a degree of precision.

‘Open’ means that we’re attentive to the body as an intelligent entirety. Rather than decide what it should feel, or how breathing should be, being open to how the body is allows it to relax, and unwind. The breathing process becomes increasingly apparent as we put aside a lot of mental content – including ideas about meditation – and prioritize this embodied intelligence. This means training yourself to relate to any unbalanced or confused mental content by aligning its energies to those of the entirety of the upright body. You keep in touch with the feel of that presence, so that it becomes a guide to being centred; here your breathing is relaxed and replenishing. Any mental dissonances can then be registered in terms of disturbances in the body – and released by connecting them to this open (and breathful) presence.

And to maintain restraint, of course. The term ‘restrained’ may bring up images of choke-chains on mastiffs, but in this context it means putting a check on thinking that follows, reacts to, or even obsessively wrangles with the hindrances. Restraint supports pausing and returning to the centre, rather than following inherited assumptions. In this way, careful, direct attention replaces careless attention. Through careful, deep attention, the verbal and non-verbal messages of our unawakened state, with their tension and turbulence, get to be expressed – but also gradually released.

##### Practical details

###### Sensing the entire body

To get the sense of the entire body, the initial step is to disengage from specific sensations while inquiring: ‘How do I know I have, or am in, a body?’ Then notice what you feel. To get an overall impression, you might imagine you’re in a shower. This impression may not be that clear, but one can train the mind to be more sensitive by moving awareness through the body in a gentle sweep.

For example, if breathing settles in the head, extend awareness down the back of the head and the spine as you breathe in and out. You may not get all the details, but slowly sweep down your back and down one leg at a time to the sole of the respective foot. The soles of the feet will tingle; they are sensitive energy points. Then draw awareness up through the soles with the in-breath to return to the head. Over the course of time, you may notice the body energy begins to flow along these and other lines, being most clearly discerned between muscle groups or where the muscles are more relaxed.

You can cultivate a similar process in the lateral direction; that is, through extending awareness from the centre of the head, or chest, etc., down the arms and into the palms of the hands. Keep the hands in the samādhi mudrā – that is, with palms relaxed and turned up, fingers and thumb tips completing the circle above them. You can keep the hands separate, one on each thigh, with each thumb tip resting on its respective index or middle finger (or both); or have one hand cradling the other in your lap, with the thumb tips touching.

Palms and soles are particularly receptive: imagine having a small ball in each palm or sole that steadily inflates and subsides with the breathing. But however you relax your palms, if you include the soles of the feet in your field of awareness, they will relax too. This ‘embodied sympathy’ eases the body into a more vibrant and open form. So rather than move your awareness in line with the breath-rhythm (as with ‘inhale into left foot, exhale out of left foot … inhale into right foot …’ and so on) – simply linger in one part for a while as breathing goes on, feeling that area of the body respond. When any clenching or numbness has gone and the area feels full and rich, you can extend further. You might imagine that a soft ball is in the centre of your body, and as you breathe, it expands and subsides in all directions simultaneously. As this effect spreads to cover the entire body, kāyasaṅkhāra is smoothed and steadied.

##### Restrictions unravel through open awareness

If you feel restrictions, don’t go into them, but widen your awareness over them as if it’s a canopy. For example, with a tight chest, widen across it to include the cavities where the arms join the trunk and on down through the hands. For the abdomen, widen awareness into the back and down through the grooves where the legs join the trunk. Imagining small breathing balls in the arm-chest cavities and the leg-abdomen grooves may help this.

If things are going well with such practices, you might refine your attention to tracking a line that proceeds from the crown, down through the throat, heart, navel and the end-point of the breathing below the navel. These anatomical references are only approximate pointers: the heart area may include the central upper torso between the breast-bone and the back. The navel and lower area may widen and deepen to include the entire base of the body and the perineum. Trace sensitively, lingering on any numb or agitated points and let awareness breathe into them. When the entire body is full of clean energy, it feels comfortably solid, and there isn’t room for hindrances to get embedded.

The citta is a sympathetic awareness, and it takes on the energies of what you give attention to, for good or for bad. Bury yourself in media and you absorb that buzzy and stimulated energy – to the point where the mind can barely function without stimulation. On the other hand, if you attend to steady and bright bodily energy, your awareness becomes steady and bright. This is a crucial point: meditation allows the citta to feel good without force or stimulation.

As for the breathing itself: after practising for a while, you’ll more readily detect breathing as a stirring that becomes a flow of vitality. Along with that there’s a quality of enrichment, brightening – and then of relaxing and releasing. Pauses will lengthen between the end of the exhalation and the beginning of the inhalation, and vice versa. I’d again emphasize that these ‘pauses’ in terms of muscular movement are a vital part of the energetic cycle of breathing. They are windows into another level of energy, ‘open energy’: it’s the open but grounded state that activated energy discharges into as the out-breath concludes. In that pause, the breath picks up fresh energy. This is then transferred through the body by the inhalation. At the end of the inhalation, there’s another pause as the energy opens into felt space.

Learn to linger in order to sense the full cycle of breathing. It’s one of discharge through the exhalation, rest and refreshment in the pause phase, brightening with the inhalation, and an opening when the inhalation ends. This is the healthy cycle. As we’ll see, this also resets the citta.

##### Relax the drive and settle into ease

If embodied energy, kāyasaṅkhāra, is overactive, there is no lingering. This overactivity is on account of a pushy, stressful citta. When pushing becomes the norm, the body becomes accustomed to stress, and the heart gets even more tense and jumpy. This results in an inadequate discharge of energy, and one’s system isn’t fully cleared and rested. Consequently, the inhalation is inhibited and refreshment is limited. Then, when we’re operating on an energy whose potential has been reduced, more energy is required to do what one has to do, and we use the forcefulness of ‘trying’. Trying to ‘get it right’ and ‘get on to the next thing’ is driven energy rather than steady, regenerative energy. This drive may be necessary for a short period or a crisis – but then one needs to discharge in order to replenish.

If that driven mode has become a way of life that covers whatever you set your mind on, it locks into how the mind conceives of reality (as a series of projects and episodes that have to be planned in advance and then filed away). It also affects the nervous system and the muscle tone in the body. We may feel restlessly active, and yet not fresh; the body may get so tense and cramped that one can barely feel much at all.

In that case, take time and care to establish bodily presence. Then, when the body is settled and the heart is receptive, establish mindfulness and follow the natural flow of the breathing. Get interested in how breathing affects heart and mind. If you sustain that awareness through the cycle, the breathing will find its unhurried length, the mind will calm – and the track of the breathing will shorten.

If this occurs, then heart and mind settle – because they’re not orienting around potentially distracting phenomena (mostly thoughts and sounds). The felt boundaries of the body and the anatomical impression that derives from that will increasingly soften, until the body is felt as a unified field with no hard edges. Breathing will manifest as a subtly vibrant energy that suffuses this entire field and sustains this new bodily form. If you give attention to that, the citta gets steeped in the suffusive effect.

This process clears staleness and tension from the body and transfers energy into the citta. This runs in tandem with the freeing of the mind from hindrances. The result is rapture and ease (pīti-sukha – which we’ll explore in due course) – and a base for insight.