# 3 – Touching Your Ground

There is the case where a bhikkhu, having gone to the wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty building, sits down folding his legs crosswise, holds his body erect, and sets mindfulness to the fore. Mindful, he breathes in; mindful, he breathes out.

##### Instructions

Find a quiet, ideally natural, place free from clutter. In a contemporary household, that could mean that you find a quiet room or corner that is empty of gadgets and items that will capture your attention.

Establish a special time of day to get in touch with what’s most fundamental to your peace of mind. Reflect upon and bring up the sense of ‘no hurry’, ‘no intrusions’. Take in such suggestions and linger in them.

Note any ideas and concerns and put aside what’s not necessary to deal with at this time. Although the thinking will probably continue, direct your attention to your body and let the mind rumble in the background.

When you feel settled, explore how you experience your body, and how you’re aware of breathing.

##### Experience is a living environment

These opening remarks precede the sixteen steps, but lay down the essential foundation: right environment. Our life force arises in a body-mind system that is attuned to its location, and as far as that system goes, safety is essential. So a scenario that’s free from obstruction and intrusion tells it that we can relax and go inward. However, there’s also our internal environment: the blend of your bodily and psychological disposition. In that environment, there’s probably some stress and discord rattling around. Hence the Buddha’s advice is to hold the body upright – because that will draw your energy together, and is the natural posture for the upright mind. So the encouragement (dwelt upon in the extended text of the discourse) is to get your attitudes clear and straight – the ethical basis needs to be firm, and attitudes of goodwill, truthfulness and letting go should be made firm. Only if there is a conscious connection to virtues and values can there be aspiration and resolve. So, consider what sets your heart upright; by sustaining that you establish the right view that can clear your inner world.

Upright in mind, upright in body: the two work together because, apart from its physical (i.e. tactile) sensitivity, the body has an embodied sense that registers ease, agitation, tension, fear, joy and so on, and that directly affects the heart of the mind. So as you work towards settling in, wherever you sense a bodily settledness, attune to that, linger and sustain awareness of it – and that will help to draw your attention out of its tangle and keep your view straight. This sustaining of awareness is ‘mindfulness’ (sati), the faculty that bears something in mind. Initially, we use this faculty to get a firm basis, a sense of ground.

What constitutes your experience of body may be a number of things. Your idea of what your body looks like is a mental construction, based on a visual impression, conceptual information and a perceptual bias. More directly, you’ll experience a series of sensations, pressures, warmth and vitality. Some of these will be physical – such as the pressure of your body on the mat, the brushing of your clothes against your skin, or of temperature or aches. These all occur dependent on physical circumstances. A more constant reference, one that is related directly to breathing and to mind, is to qualities of firmness, vitality, movement and suppleness in your body. In the Buddhist analysis, these ‘elements’ are respectively earth, fire, air and water. They manifest in negative and positive states physically (bone, for example, is firm ‘earth’), in terms of embodied reflexes (arousal is warm ‘fire’) and also in psychological terms (joy is warm/‘fire’, and restlessness is ‘air’). You experience these, but may not recognize them. When a fever or a psychological crisis passes, isn’t it reassuring to feel ‘solid’ again? That’s an embodied reference; physically, you’re no more solid than when you felt like a woozy blob.

Notice how emotions and moods are normally described according to that elemental palette – ‘rigid mentality’, ‘all fired up’, ‘cold-hearted’, ‘flexible’. You’ve probably sensed these. And don’t forget the ‘space’ element – open, free from pressure (or the converse). In this context, the point is that at a fundamental and involuntary level, our mental states are based on embodied sensitivity. If your heart is agitated or depressed, you feel it in your body – and that affects your outlook and mindset. This also means that if you settle and refresh your embodied condition, your mind gets settled and refreshed.

The snag is that although this natural mind is connected to your embodied sensitivity, most likely you aren’t: you’re used to operating in terms of ideas and abstractions like ‘tomorrow’ and ‘that place is forty miles, an hour in a car (etc.) away.’ All accurate in terms of mapping, but they’re abstractions, not embodied experiences. In addition to this, most of our current ways of orientation, guidance, informing and learning are done through the written word (or an image on a screen). This mode of perception operates through a narrow aperture of visual attention, one that ignores the major part of the visual field and all other sensory input. While watching a screen, one may be almost completely unaware of one’s bodily presence. A lot of the time it seems we are experiencing a stream of written words, which one’s eyes and mind follow – from one point to the next and so on. This is unlike the body’s way of perceiving, in which, even as a hand or foot negotiates a detail, awareness of the body’s presence as an entirety is retained as a backdrop. Through this embodied awareness we retain balance when we walk, and are able to place food in our mouths without losing touch with the rest of our bodies. While driving a car, we can discern whether we need to eat or urinate without letting go of the steering wheel. It is this embodied sensitivity, with its reflexes and releases, that breathing can steady and bring to brightness and ease.

##### Embodied intelligence

For forest-dwellers at the time of the Buddha, with nothing to read, no schedule or deadline to meet, no future to speak of, and no concerns regarding family or income to manage, direct embodied awareness would have been the norm. The written word was a rarity; teachings were delivered through speech – whereby the listener picked up the body language, tonality, and breath-pauses of the speaker (who was attending to the responses of the listener in a similar way). It was the whole picture that transmitted the meaning. In general, the attention of such a forest-dweller would not be focused on any single point: focus too intently on a sight and you might trip over a root or not detect the odour of a tiger on the wind. No, to get through the forest, indeed to survive, you have to have an overall receptivity, grounded in your body in the here and now. Your thinking has to be minimal, your mind quietly attentive. You may notice sights and sounds of course, but you don’t follow them carelessly. Instead, you notice if you’re tired or weak or excited – and you balance that mind-state and energy against the presentation of external phenomena. As with ‘Can I climb over that?’, ‘Do I have the strength to deal with that?’, ‘Am I getting fearful and careless?’

The state of awareness in a wilderness at night is not concerned with ideas and plans for next year; it’s processing the relationship between the vulnerable body and the world that opens directly around it. In this environment, mind is not a preoccupied planner or detached commentator – it’s the intelligent receptivity attuned to how one’s body (and life force) is contacting a world of otherness. It is acutely sensitive and resourceful.

People of non-industrial cultures used and still use this embodied intelligence to track animals, predict weather and navigate across vast ocean tracts; in that respect, they were and are far more intelligent than today’s city-dwellers. This is an important point to grasp, because embodied intelligence plays a crucial part in attending to breathing. And it’s an intelligence that we’ve by and large lost touch with. So the training that most people will need to work on is one of accessing their bodily sensitivity, and responding to it carefully to refresh and calm it. Breathing-based meditation will help with this, but don’t focus on the breathing until you can sense it happening. When your body is adequately settled, the rhythm of breathing will become apparent; if it’s not apparent, give more attention to settling your body into its environment, and establishing that upright, receptive mind. Otherwise meditation can be hard work that requires strong mental effort – and may strain the mind and stifle the heart.

As a reference to embodied awareness, you might use the awareness that accompanies swimming or T’ai Chi – where it is not overlaid with a sense of getting something or somewhere, and instead participates in the here and now. As with sitting quietly at the root of a tree: deeply settled, not perched; fully resting on what’s beneath you, and feeling safe under the canopy with the firm trunk behind you – attuned and at ease.

##### Practical details

###### Posture

The ideal to work towards in terms of posture is one of having the backside firmly planted on the ground; then one can tune in to the sense of being supported. With sitting, the pelvic floor and thighs are set in a triangular form to support the torso. You might use a chair, but don’t lean on the back and do keep your legs apart to replicate that supportive triangle. It’s important to keep your spine erect, so that the weight of the chest doesn’t press onto the abdomen and restrict the breathing. You might need to gently draw the lumbar back in so that the abdomen opens and lengthens, but don’t go too far: if your lower back is pulled into a bow, it may pressurize and tighten the abdomen. In the correct posture, the abdomen feels open but light because the weight of the torso is transferred down the spine, through the pelvic floor and into what you’re sitting on. Draw your arms slightly away from the sides of the chest, and resting your hands, palms open on your thighs or in your lap, let your upper body open. The chest should expand and subside easily with the flow of air; the abdomen doesn’t pull or swell. Instead, that region feels free but only flexes slightly. Then the breathing tends to go deeper and is enriching. The fundamental sense is of being supported, rather than holding yourself up.

##### Tune in to the given

The felt impression of resting down through the base of the body provides the embodied sense of ‘ground’. It’s a given. Letting your awareness linger in that will introduce you to how to sense elemental embodied qualities whose harmony brings stability and replenishment. That is, you don’t try to experience them; instead, you sense what is already there. The first impression that may arise from that restful state of ground is one of firmness: ‘earth’. Sense that quality in the body as a whole; also notice how it’s conducive to an upright spine. Mental attitude – firm, or more relaxed – can negotiate the balance between slack and stiff; then when that balance gets clear, linger in that and take in how it feels. The embodied effect, or ‘sign’, of balance will help to settle the mind. Breathing may become apparent.

Then attune to comfortable and vital warmth: ‘fire’. Can you rest your awareness in that and let your unforced breathing draw from that warmth and spread it through your body? Then air: is the breathing at ease, unrestricted, passing through the body freely? Give it time and space. As for water … are there any aspects of the body that feel disconnected from the whole? Consciously connect the more integrated parts of the body to include the head and throat. Also, are you in touch with the space around your body? If not, widen your span of attention to include the boundaries of your skin, and the absence of pressure there. Breathe into this too. Because breathing connects awareness to the felt ‘inner’ body of the nervous system, if you cultivate it in this way, it will carry these subtly vital effects through the entire system.

To add to the sense of being supported, you might imagine that a thread is descending from above your head into the crown and holding it up – but don’t lift your head. Then imagine that this thread can carry the rest of your body – first let the neck be long, then gradually relax the shoulders and so on down your back. Another image that may be useful is of warm water or oil slowly running down your back, over the haunches and down into the ground. I emphasize the ‘downward’ direction as this helps to release stress. On occasion, you might also practise a slow sweep of awareness through the physical body – scalp, eyelids, eye-sockets, temples, around the mouth – and so on.

Establish and keep referring to the spinal axis – not so much as a stack of vertebrae, but as the embodied sense of ‘upright, balanced’.

In such ways, you bring sensitive awareness through the entire body, from top to toe. The sense of support is to be encouraged, because the workaday lifestyle can produce wilful ‘get it done’ attitudes that condition stress. As you know, under pressure, the belly tightens up, and the diaphragm – the sheet of muscle between the abdomen and the chest that participates in the regulation of breathing – also tightens. This tightening effect constricts the abdomen; breathing is then restricted to the chest, and lacks depth. Then we don’t breathe out fully and we don’t get relaxed.

Attuning to breathing is only possible in a comfortably receptive way when the body is poised and at ease. So keep settling in, until when you ask ‘How do I directly know I’m breathing?’, you sense the tide of the breathing process. Let it arise rather than go hunting for it. Don’t map the breathing either – just settle down and let it flow through.

When you sustain this balanced and upright awareness, and centre your awareness of your body around it, there is a steady and spacious embodied sense that the breathing flows through. That current of breathing and the upright sense support each other. Then you are firmly established, like a wide-canopied tree rooted in the Earth. Well done! To have touched and stayed on your own ground is a massive step towards improving your clarity and calm.