# 11 – Saṅkhāra

There are these three formations … the bodily formation, the verbal formation, and the mental formation.

In-breathing and out-breathing … are the bodily formation; applied thought/placing and sustained thought/sensing are the verbal formation; perception and feeling are the mental formation.

(M.44:13-14)

##### Formative energies and the contracted state

As an overview of the process that I’ve detailed in the last few chapters, I’d like to explore what is referred to as ‘formation’, ‘saṅkhāra’ (plural saṅkhārā). ‘Formation’ is a common though not very accessible translation – but the number of ways of translating ‘saṅkhāra’ indicates the difficulty of finding a single word or compound to cover all its meaning and applications. Saṅkhāra is also rendered as ‘volitional formation’, ‘kamma-formation’, ‘fabrication’, ‘condition’, ‘determination’, ‘preparation’, ‘activity’, ‘conditioning force’ and ‘synergy’. Without wishing to further complicate the matter, I’d suggest ‘formative energy’ or ‘program’ can also help to make its meaning clear. In terms of experience, saṅkhārā are the reflexes and responses – for example, of forcefulness, agitation, or enthusiasm – that steer us.

Moreover, these formative energies shape us. You can witness these in terms of body language – when people get angry or fearful, visible and palpable changes occur. Depending on how it’s triggered, kāyasaṅkhāra can activate bodily reflexes of tension or relaxation, defence or welcome and so on. And in tandem with that, cittasaṅkhāra, the mental (or heart) formation, sends emotions and impulses rippling through the body. So the heart gets shaped as light or compressed, expansive or tight. Finally, based upon these energies and shapes, the mind gets activated and fabricates trains of thought: the formation/program called ‘vacīsaṅkhāra’. That manas program produces thought-streams that may be clear and direct or muddy and meandering – and shape a course of action. Saṅkhārā: once you unwrap the word, you see how crucial and intimate they are.

To summarize: these three saṅkhārā are energetic programs that underpin and connect body, heart and thinking. They get things going, and the way saṅkhārā move in the bodily and mental domains lays down results and establishes patterns for further action – for one’s welfare or harm. Saṅkhārā are the basis of cause and effect. This is why understanding them is so central.

To grasp the full significance of saṅkhārā, it should be borne in mind that these formative energies co-activate bodily and mental experiences. A bodily saṅkhāra will form a corresponding emotional form and vice versa. To take a simple example: discordant saṅkhārā are experienced as bodily tension, or somatic blocks, that links to emotional reactivity, psychological imbalance and compulsive, afflictive thinking. In this state, they establish what in classical parlance is referred to as ‘clinging to the aggregates (khandhā)’ and which I’ll call ‘the contracted state’. This is the norm wherein the citta is experienced as an isolated self, stuck inside a body, separated from and yet surrounded by a world. In this condition, the thinking process tries to establish the future, work on an identity, and speculates and obsesses over the details of that virtual reality. All that can be summarized as saṅkhāra affected by ignorance.

This scenario becomes apparent in meditation, when there is no apparent reason to feel tense or depressed, or to plan the future. What is occurring is that a mental formation (cittasaṅkhāra) is producing these moods, impulses and attitudes. These may be familiar and they are all convincing – intense dramas of the wrongs others have done to you (or of the wrongs you have done to others) will arise; either that or colourful fantasies of what you could be doing now rather than just sitting here. Consequently, there’s a lot of thinking (i.e. the verbal formation picks up the emotional theme). What the average person doesn’t really give attention to is the effect on their bodies and how this amalgam of heart, thought and body shapes the contracted world-view. And yet, acting on this, one generates consequent scenarios: ‘… some person generates hurtful bodily saṅkhārā, hurtful verbal saṅkhārā, and hurtful mental saṅkhārā. In consequence, they arise in a hurtful context. When they arise in a hurtful context, they receive hurtful contact. Being touched by hurtful contact, they feel feelings that are hurtful and miserable.’ (A.3:23)

The kind of scenario that this outlines is one wherein one’s own contracted state gives rise to a sense of isolation, and configures an alienated world through focusing on details that will confirm that view. Then, from that basis, there arise emotional proliferations about one’s inadequacies or that of others, along with the need to go somewhere else or be someone else. These patterns can become established with traumatic intensity. Moreover, personal strategies and attitudes, far from being able to unravel these saṅkhārā, often get generated as a response to deflect attention from their underlying presence. We fidget, distract, nibble, switch on a device – and so on. This gets compulsive. Someone who seeks their own welfare therefore has to proceed in the face of distorted saṅkhārā, guided by the direct experience that ‘this is stressful, constricted, is good for neither myself nor others – and it can be changed.’

##### Handling reflexes

Yes, saṅkhārā can be managed to bring around harmony and release. This is the thrust of the sequence of meditation teachings we’re exploring, whereby bodily, mental and verbal saṅkhārā are cleared of obstructions. The result is bodily refreshment, ease, and quiet lucidity. Even more profound, the insightful understanding of them opens the citta to the realization of the asaṅkhata, the unconditioned release of the heart.

For an undeveloped mind, the roots of saṅkhārā are involuntary and inaccessible; one finds oneself caught in, or overwhelmed by, a sudden surge or constriction in the body and heart. So it takes a practice such as ānāpānasati – which covers the energies of body, heart and thinking – to penetrate that involuntary reflex; then to steady, soothe and release it. Just sensing the true ground of the body, in an unobstructive space with breathing rhythmically flowing through it, offers a cleansing. As the results of this clearance are a bright and easeful heart, this alone makes ānāpānasati a powerful resource for liberation.

Understanding that saṅkhārā are conditioned energies rather than aspects of a true self is another important theme. In fact, although they build me (or my psychological shape anyway) and my world, these formative energies don’t even depend on what I’ve done. Saṅkhārā are also acquired through the actions or influence of others (as mentioned in 7 Training the Mind with the Body). In other words, your mindset is not fundamentally your own; it has been conditioned by the parental and social contexts within which you grew up, with their perspectives, imperatives and aims. Your bodily energies and impulses – open, relaxed, defensive, jittery – are similarly conditioned. You’ve been programmed by the modes and language of your nation and family. And that involves taboos, prejudices, and the aims of the mainstream – including striving for goals that you can’t achieve and an identity you can’t have. At best, the conditioning forces of the social world bind you into being a person subject to loss and gain, competition and comparison, the need to get on, and anxiety about failure and social rejection.

The impulsive and creative aspects of these formations, their potency and ability to steer behaviour for good or bad, are taken to be an agent known as ‘I’. Thus, these saṅkhārā form a kammic footprint or blueprint: ‘myself’. They shape a self-impression and establish a behavioural basis day after day: we keep becoming, embellishing and confirming saṅkhāra patterns laid down in the past. Yet, as one begins to recognize, although it seems like I’m doing the worrying, doubting or craving, ‘I’ can’t seem to stop it (granted, one might be able to suppress the saṅkhāra for a while). So what kind of an agent am ‘I’ – when I can’t establish decisive agency over my mind?

Now we might start to call ourselves names such as ‘worrier’, ‘compulsive’ – or avoid the issue altogether. But none of these check the stress that our minds inflict on ourselves and others; nor do they allow our considerable potential as wise and great-hearted beings to actualize. The Dhamma-strategy then is to meet these saṅkhārā, and steady and cool them – and through that gain access to the asaṅkhata, the unconditioned ‘unbinding’: nibbāna.

##### Releasing blockage

In order to release the knot whereby saṅkhārā form the contracted state, you use skilful saṅkhāra. These helpful formations include the kind of thinking and the heart energies and attitudes that flow along with healthy breath-energy. In a nutshell: be guided by your breathing rather than your self.

As a practical tip, this means that you don’t aim for the centre of the problem, and you don’t try to fix it; instead, you turn your attention to the overall embodied presence and let that steady your awareness. From that basis you access a source of steady and soothing energy – in this case, that of in- and out-breathing. (Otherwise, the presence of a kind and steady person is an invaluable resource.) Then the practice is to keep connecting the difficult area to the healthy mix of verbal, embodied and heart energies you have established as a foundation. This can then flow into and work on the difficult pieces – in its own time and way. Herein the golden rule is that you don’t go into a bodily or psychological area that feels highly activated, troubled or potent without that steady presence. The motto is: ‘good energy knows what it’s doing, so stay with it.’

As this work, and the releasing effect that it has, may seem disorienting, how can you be confident that this is the correct approach? The two standards to keep checking in with are: a) ‘Is my whole body here – can I feel my feet, and my back? If I can’t, am I spinning out or tightening up? Better stand up, flex a little, or walk.’ This approach can help to facilitate a proper boundary within which energy can settle. In tandem with that, point b) is: ‘Can I establish and maintain a quality of goodwill towards this experience?’ This isn’t as straightforward as it may seem, because it requires wise goodwill, not a sentimental coating. Goodwill as a Dhamma practice is informed by the understanding that ‘This energy or condition needs some supportive attention. I will place my awareness next to it and listen. May this quality of patient and sympathetic attention help it to find its resolution.’

This may seem to be over-cautious, but saṅkhārā are both the patterns laid down by reactions such as fear or repression or other forms of stress, as well as the ways whereby we manage these reactions. In brief, our emotional outbursts, our skilful and unskilful responses – kamma – are saṅkhārā. But rather than suppress or complicate them, the wise approach is to use embodiment and a steady heart to release and resolve these ‘kamma-formations’.

##### Skilful thoughtfulness

The energy and effective use of vacīsaṅkhāra is encouraged. As the thinking mind is the most common form of mind that feels contracted and stressful, meditators will often attempt to silence this thinking process. It’s true that a lessening in conceptual activity and intensity is encouraged: the Buddha comments that even skilful thinking ‘might tire the body, and when the body is tired, the mind becomes strained, and when the mind is strained, it is far from concentration.’ (M.19:8) However, what we often fail to make use of is simple and skilful thoughtfulness, the manas activity of careful, deep attention. In practice, this means to use a word or a reminder to keep lifting attention and placing it on the simple grounding presence of the whole body until the flow of breathing can be sensed.

When there is enough stability, the thinking mind can also be employed to investigate and explore the qualities (dhammā) of the contracted state – and their release. For this, rather than suppress thinking altogether, we contemplate the tone of the emotion that supports the thought as it arises and takes hold. This is the sign of the mental formation – there’s a pressure, a blurring or a contraction of some sort. One should know it as such (rather than as an objectively true state of affairs) and, again, pause, widen attention to include the entire body, and hold that sign within the calming and receptive flow of the breathing. As the hindrances abate, you’ll get some understanding of how your heart gets caught, how it forms you and your history, and how you can step out of that. As you feel the sign shift, maintain attention and stay open – and gradually energies and feelings of refreshment and ease will arise. Let them determine how you experience your body and moderate your mind.

Working in this area, understanding dawns – that any mental form, mind-state or attitude is conditioned and not-self; and that the true basis is not any of these, but signlessness. When the open, unconditioned balance of mind is directly known, any contracted state is also recognized as needing to be released – rather than allowed to support confused and afflictive mental states.

There are further aspects to this saṅkhāra process, but we’ll get into that later.