# 19 – Great Fruit

This is how mindfulness of in-and-out breathing is developed and made much of so as to be of great fruit, of great benefit.

##### Immediate benefits

Apart from the value to one’s physical and neurological health, mindfulness of breathing calms and steadies the emotions and provides a useful anchor to return to when one’s mind is swamped with urgent or obsessive thoughts. These are the first manifest, accessible and beneficial results of establishing mindfulness of breathing.

These benefits, if developed, lead on to the liberation of the heart. This means freedom from the suffering of fear, depression and bitterness. This doesn’t mean that we don’t feel anything, but rather that we can breathe a steady and remedial energy through qualities such as rage, anxiety or stagnation. Then the discomfort of life doesn’t cause the citta to lose its balance and generate ripples of stress and anguish.

In more detail, the Buddha points out that this freedom occurs in tandem with the development of seven factors of awakening and four establishments of mindfulness. These are the strengths and perspectives that effect that liberation. The seven factors are: mindfulness, exploration of dhammā, energy, rapture, tranquillity/soothing, concentration and equanimity. With some reflection, you can see how all of these factors come into play as you practice; in fact, some factors are directly referenced in the sutta.

##### Mindfulness is the key to a great opening

The common denominator between the factors of awakening and the four ‘establishments’ (upaṭṭhāna) is mindfulness. These establishments represent where one directs mindfulness – towards the body, feeling, mind/heart and dhammā – with liberating results. Of these four, the body acts as the fundamental base for mindfulness. With a good grounding in the breathing body, we can manage to not react when meeting the evocative experience of feeling. That being the case, it becomes possible to remain open and steady in the face of the even more moving experience of the affective citta. As the citta, with its impulsive energies and compelling habits, is that with which we identify, to maintain a coolly disengaged attention when meeting that is transformational. A skilful handling of citta’s phenomena (dhammā) liberates.

The fourth establishment, of dhammā, is where mindfulness forms a path out of worldly currents. The contemplative trains to witness how obstructive dhammā such as hindrances come into being and what causes them to persist or decline. Similarly for supportive factors. This is the wisdom of know-how, the wisdom of Path. It leads to the wisdom of realization: that none of this is personal. With directly experienced realization, form, feeling, perception, activations and consciousness are seen as relative and changeable, and a reset occurs.

For example, one can only witness one’s embodiment as a changing process of sensations and energies for so long before orientation around its visual appearance wanes and is replaced by something healthier and more realistic. Wisdom in terms of addressing and steadying bodily energies will make illness, ageing and death less oppressive. In terms of perceptions, long-established attitudes about oneself, and others, when seen as changeable breezes that flutter in the heart, tend to die down, void of passion and belief. Memories and personal history can be accessed, but they don’t flood the citta. All in all, one’s relationship to conditioned reality becomes dispassionate and filled with care and integrity. And as far as the citta’s knowing aspect goes, that rests on an unconditioned basis.

Given the predominant role that mindfulness plays in the path of liberation, mindfulness can be understood to be the aware state that accompanies all processes and steps in ānāpānasati. This causes us to consider mindfulness to encompass all the skills needed to stay with and supervise the handling of a topic with the purpose of awakening. This is because right mindfulness is based on right view; we bear breathing in mind in line with that view of the potential for unskilful and skilful states. And within this frame of reference, hindrances get abandoned and the factors of awakening arise.

These factors detail what spiritual assets arise on the path of awakening and in what order. The first three – mindfulness, exploration (dhammavicāya), and energy (viriya) – are qualities that one can arouse. We apply mindfulness, establish it and thereby facilitate a process of exploring the conditioning forces that make up our everyday reality. This takes energy, but also liberates it from being used in damaging or distracting ways. As the embodied citta gets released from concocting fantasies, doubts, grudges and anxieties, the energy that these programs run on gets freed up. It then refreshes the citta with rapture – an experience likened to the uplift one would receive on recovering from a grievous illness or on being released from prison.

Rapture then is something that happens rather than something you do. This is the turning point in awakening where the more active and directive factors act as a foundation for enhanced and enjoyed receptivity. The first of these is tranquillity (passadhi): mindfully one soothes and steadies the citta by referring to how rapture affects the body (rather than focusing intently on the feeling itself – which will tend to excite the heart-mind). To do this requires the dispassionate receptivity that allows one’s heart-energies to consolidate. The consequent consolidation is samādhi, the contented and settled mind. The citta therefore has an equanimous tone and outlook.

##### Key points

A few points may outline the awakening process:

It’s about getting embodied, being with the primary experience of being alive, rather than with the nervous energy of our daily and kammic functions. When there is embodied security and confidence, the breathing-energy will carry that message through the entire body.

It’s about feeling, and working with that. From sensory to embodied and heart-based.

It’s about simplifying and getting to the roots of what you’re experiencing. Notice how triggering and conditioning occur. Learn to calm these saṅkhārā by referring to them directly: not so much ‘They don’t like me’ but ‘agitation and uncertainty’. Translate ‘I should be’ and ‘I ought to do’ into ‘pressure’. Then you can contain these activating effects in your entire body (widen attention to include feet and back) and through mindfully relaxing, release them.

It’s about cooling and releasing. Take time to disengage heart and mind from what affects them. Linger in that open state, appreciating it. Then give careful attention to what arises.

Remember: there’s nothing wrong with you.