# 16 – Jhāna

Bhikkhus, I say that the ending of the corruptions [āsavā] depends on the first jhāna …. There is the case where a monk, disengaged from sensuality, disengaged from unskilful qualities, enters and remains in the first jhāna …. He regards whatever phenomena there that are connected with form, feeling, perception, formations and consciousness, as changeable, stressful …. He turns his mind away from those phenomena, and having done so, inclines his mind to the deathless: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime – that is the stilling of all saṅkhāra … nibbāna.’

(A.9:36)

##### Jhāna as a skilful resource

As we’re working through the instructions in theory and in practice, we’re approaching experiences that are not of the common world: occasions and practices whereby thinking calms down, and embodied suffusions of refreshment and ease are experienced. And as we come into the teachings on citta, we’re bringing to the fore a non-conceptual intelligence (or sensitivity, or awareness) that often sits behind our thinking mind. We’re also touching into the native place of that citta: it’s not the domain of seeing, hearing, touching and the rest (kāma-loka, the sensual domain), nor is it the abstract domain of thoughts and ideas. Awareness persists, and flourishes, when both these domains have been quietened. As that quietening or settling occurs, what comes to the fore is the experience of mood, intuition, embodied energies and ‘gut knowledge’. Through encompassing all or any of that with breathing, activations settle and the citta enters the fine-material domain (rūpa-loka) of subtle energies and inner silence. The experience of being settled within this is called ‘jhāna’.

In the discourses, jhāna is almost always translated as ‘absorption’ – a condition whereby the mind experiences refined agreeable and wholesome states; its focus is unified and its activities are reduced. In the suttas, it is equated with right concentration, sammā-samādhi. In this context, jhāna is considered to be an essential foundation whereby the most fundamental corruptions – the ‘outflows’ or ‘taints’ (āsavā) – are withheld so that insight-wisdom can abolish them (A.9:36). This process might be likened to repairing a breach in a dam: one first of all holds back or calms the flood, and that allows one to examine where the breach is and then fix it. Likewise, the power and steadiness of jhāna stop the outflow into ‘the world out there’, so that insight-wisdom can address why the citta feels it has to keep all that running. Accordingly, the citta is liberated (cetovimutti) – i.e. no longer caught in the effects of the āsavā – and there is the clarity that clears the cause that supported these outflows. Dependent on jhāna, the citta can be directed to formless states and/or to the ending of the outflows. The latter direction is a liberation by wisdom (paññāvimutti); one’s awareness sees through the ignorance that binds conditions into a state of being called ‘myself’, and thereby lets go of that basis. In terms of this process, jhāna is not a final liberation – but it is important as a step in that direction.

There are four jhānā. These represent four levels of increasingly reduced mental/emotional activity and increasingly refined sources of steadiness and pleasure. For example, wayward thoughts and distracting moods cease before the mind ‘enters’ the first jhāna; placing-and-sensing (vitakka-vicāra) ceases in the second jhāna; rapture ceases in the third; and the tides of pleasure and pain dissolve into equanimity in the fourth. The jhānā are also described in terms of what does manifest in them: vitakka-vicāra, rapture and ease are to the fore in the first; confidence, unification, rapture and bodily ease in the second; equanimity, bodily ease, mindfulness and full awareness in the third; and mindfulness and equanimity in the fourth. These jhānā are all embodied and have notable embodied effects – here are a few snippets from the descriptions of how they feel:

(first jhāna) ‘He makes the rapture and ease born of disengagement [viveka] drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and ease born of disengagement.’

(second jhāna) [the same but instead of ‘disengagement’ read ‘concentration’] ‘… no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and ease born of concentration.’

(third jhāna) ‘He makes the ease divested of rapture drench … [as above] … so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the ease divested of rapture.’

(fourth jhāna) ‘He sits pervading this body with the pure bright mind, so there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.’ (M.39:15-18; M.77:25-28; M.119:18-21)

The images that flesh out these descriptions are of bathing and otherwise easing the entire body and covering it in cool (this is a tropical country) and pleasant wrappings. So jhāna is embodied and felt. As the Ānāpānasati Sutta states: ‘In one whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.’ (M.118:35) Note, however, that ‘concentration’ isn’t mentioned as a factor of the first jhāna. The first jhāna is a state wherein the mind isn’t going into or occupied by sense-contact, is lingering in the ease of the settled bodily formation, but hasn’t yet settled into its own presence. Yet, in the suttas this jhāna is referred to as a base for insight-liberation (see A.9:36 above).

##### Jhāna as the basis of meditation – and obsession

The practice of arriving at these states is fundamental enough for the Buddha to use the verbal form ‘jhāyati’ (translated as ‘meditate’) to urge his disciples to deepen their practice. ‘Meditate [jhāyatha], bhikkhus, do not be negligent … this is my advice.’ The occasions when this exhortation occurs are at the end of a teaching, as in the Kamma Sutta (S.35:145). In this instance the Buddha wasn’t giving instructions on a meditation technique, but on kamma and the Eightfold Path. So the meaning is: ‘Get on with the meditative work, don’t waste time!’ It’s a broad encouragement of right view, right effort and right mindfulness – not an instruction on focusing on a meditation object.

In British parlance, he might have said: ‘Get stuck in!’ (= ‘Engage, work at it!’). On occasion, the suttas use this term humorously when disciples ‘get stuck’ or ‘come unstuck’ in the wrong kind of preoccupation:

‘While he harbours sensual lust within, he meditates [jhāyati], un-meditates [pajjhāyati], de-meditates [nijjhāyati], and mis-meditates [apajjhāyati]. He abides with his mind obsessed by ill will, a prey to ill will … with his mind obsessed by sloth and torpor, a prey to sloth and torpor … with his mind obsessed by restlessness and remorse, a prey to restlessness and remorse … with his mind obsessed by doubt, a prey to doubt, and he does not understand as it actually is the escape from arisen doubt. While he harbours doubt within, he meditates, un-meditates, de-meditates, and mis-meditates. The Blessed One did not praise that kind of meditation [jhāna].’ (M.108:26)

and:

‘just as a donkey unladen, standing by a door-post or a dustbin or a drain, meditates, un-meditates, de-meditates, and mis-meditates ….’ (M.50:13)

So the word ‘jhāna’ can also be applied to all kinds of absorptions, good or bad. But with the right view and approach, and if carried out with finesse, jhāyati will bring around the correct kind of jhāna. The finesse that’s needed is first to clear the hindrances, and then to steady and settle the mind in the fine-material domain. In the latter stages of this process, snags called ‘upakkilesa’ – such as inattention, elation, an imbalance of energy – have to be met and remedied. This takes time and skill, and there is an incident recorded at M.128 where the Buddha himself speaks to one of his great disciples of the difficulties of working through these defects. The effect to me is reassuring – even the Buddha had to persevere and work with some ungratifying but understandable stuff.

##### Disembodied and embodied jhāna

There is often confusion about the use of the term ‘jhāna’ because the later commentaries, notably the Visuddhimagga, use it differently. In the Visuddhimagga, jhāna is disembodied, and it relies on a method of generating paranormal nimitta in the mind that the meditator consequently absorbs his or her attention into. And, yes, in the above incident of the Buddha’s working with upakkilesa, he does speak of referring to light and ‘the vision of forms’ – but these phenomena are signs that can arise as rapture and ease are experienced in embodied meditation. Significantly, and in contradiction to the mental nimitta of the Visuddhimagga, he doesn’t absorb into these signs, but uses them as indicators of occasions when his mind slips out of samādhi. Just as one might use a signpost, or the line of lights on the highway: you don’t absorb into them, but use them to affirm that you’re on the right road. This indicates that the mind can note and reflect on its state in the jhāna process – a referencing that is also mentioned at A.5:28. This is the reflective capacity that allows insight-wisdom to occur within the jhāna context – that is, one reviews the mind-state as compounded out of conditioned and changeable factors (as at M.52:4-7; M.64:9-12). One does not fixate, and, according to these accounts, full liberation ensues.

The Visuddhimagga also separates meditation practice into two distinct paths: samatha – which leads to a jhāna wherein sensory phenomena and mental activity cease; and vipassanā – which avoids such absorption, and through a refined scrutiny of the impermanent and selfless nature of all phenomena, leads to nibbāna. In this presentation, samatha is pleasant and leads to sublime states, but is a dead-end in terms of liberation because from its viewpoint, jhāna curtails the functioning of analytical wisdom. Instead, the Visuddhimagga presents a path of ‘dry’ insight; its practice operates around an ongoing and detailed analysis of citta, bypasses feeling, doesn’t support cultivating pleasant states and lingering in them, doesn’t require jhāna, but leads directly to nibbāna through analytical discernment alone. This path of insight proceeds through specific realizations that, however, aren’t mentioned in the suttas.

Without wishing to discount this approach, I find it confusing. It may well be the case that fashioning a mind-made nimitta and focusing on it will result in some kind of jhāna, but I don’t see an instance where the Buddha recommends this. Also, why did he not mention an ‘insight-only’ path? And why make so much of jhāna if it was extremely difficult to achieve, and not leading to liberation? Regarding this last point: in the suttas, the mind in jhāna is able to be directed or turned towards either immaterial states or the ending of the āsavā. In other words, it acts as the basis for insight, not as an alternative. This is in line with the suttas’ presentation of samatha and vipassanā working together ‘like two oxen yoked’ (A.4:93-94). My conclusion is that we’re looking at two different kinds of jhāna – a disembodied one in which the citta is fixed on a mind-made sign, and an embodied one in which the citta is firmly settled in itself and able to review the aggregates and the outflows.

So a key to the suttas’ jhāna may well be the support that embodiment gives to the mind. In the commentaries, the body is seen as an object, and its sensory aspect dwelt upon in ways that will produce distaste. It belongs to the kāma-loka, the sensory world. The embodied domain that one can access through mindfulness of the energies in the body isn’t mentioned – yet this is the territory that if cultivated opens into the fine-material world (rūpa-loka), and will give rise to the kind of jhāna that is mentioned in the suttas. They refer to touching deliverance with the body (M.70:15; S.12:70; A.9:43).

This ‘embodied jhāna’ may resolve certain anomalies. For example, jhāna is held to be secluded/disengaged from sense-contact, and yet at A.3:63, the Buddha mentions abiding in jhāna while sitting, walking, standing or reclining. Walking without any awareness of sight and touch seems unlikely; so instead of the complete absence of sensory awareness, what could be the case is that he is fully collected within the fine-material aspect of the body, while allowing such sense-contact as was relevant to be made. There is an instance where the Buddha remains oblivious to a thunderstorm – apparently on account of his absorption (D.16:4.31-32). In such a case, the citta would remain turned away from phenomena that it wasn’t involved with (unlike walking or breathing). So the accounts, limited as they are, do suggest some flexibility. Furthermore: before his awakening the Buddha did experience immaterial states (āruppa) but found them inadequate for realization of the Deathless. (Incidentally, the commentaries refer to these immaterial states as jhāna, again in contradiction to the embodied basis of the suttas’ jhāna.)

One account of the Buddha’s awakening (M.36:30-32) has it that he withdrew from that approach and began the cultivation of ānāpānasati that resulted in jhāna, commenting that he was ‘not afraid of that pleasure, since it has nothing to do with sensual pleasures and unwholesome states.’ This approach led to full enlightenment. Could it be that his breakthrough was one of accessing and cultivating the fine-material domain within the body? It’s natural enough to discount that troubled and volatile ‘inner body’ and aim for an immaterial abiding. And yet, the Buddha touched that territory, made it pleasurable, and was awakened through it. He even passed away in jhāna, not in a formless state.

##### Jhāna as a natural process

As to whether you can do this … my sense is that the jhāna process is a natural progression: if you’d rather feel settled than agitated; if you wish to clear your mind of dullness, irritation and sense-desire; and if you make the process of clearing these obstacles and settling thorough and enjoyable, then you are cultivating jhāna, whether you complete it, or define it as such, or not. If you absorb into any of those states the sutta outlines after soothing the bodily formation, you’ll get the results.

Putting aside the theory for now, my advice then is to begin with settling into your body where you are, and bringing up themes that have to do with your values and meanings. This reflecting on and training the citta in terms of virtue, goodwill and renunciation is the standard approach. As the citta attunes to right view, you immerse awareness in your body as you sense your breathing. Keep referring to and deepening into this embodied and heartful focus, discarding distractions and hindrances as best you can. Even if there are residual blemishes and agitations, practise placing your attention on and fully sensing the occasions when the mind is unhindered. Carried through, this will bring refreshment/rapture and ease in terms of body and mind. Then linger in that and firm it up. This does require a wise intent – to neither waver, nor hold tight; to flexibly accommodate shifts of energy and tone, but to not get drawn into them; to cool elation and warm the stillness. Although writing about this makes it seem very tricky, non-conceptual intelligence will find a balanced way – just as it does for a gymnast, singer or calligrapher. And it’s an intelligence that can always be entered by dwelling fully in the heart-intelligence behind ethics: not fixated on rules, but with sensitivity attuned to the welfare of beings. Enter with that spirit and learn by trial and error.