# 8 – Hindrances

Bhikkhus, there are these five obstructions, hindrances, encumbrances of the mind, states that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire is an obstruction, a hindrance, an encumbrance of the mind, a state that weakens wisdom. Ill will … mental stiffness and lethargy … Restlessness and remorse … Doubt …. These are the five obstructions, hindrances, encumbrances of the mind, states that weaken wisdom.

Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these five obstructions, hindrances, encumbrances of the mind, states that weaken wisdom, it is impossible that a bhikkhu, with his powerless and feeble wisdom, might know his own good, the good of others, or the good of both, or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

(A.5:51)

##### Hooks in the heart

Throughout the processes we’ve touched into, you will have to deal with various obstructions: clouds of thoughts, bursts and spools of emotions, as well as unevenness in the breathing. Unfortunately, the attitudes and environment associated with mainstream life in the world do leave negative side-effects. These ‘hooks in the heart’ seem very personal, and vary in degree dependent on each individual’s experience. But they are a natural feature that we all have to deal with.

Getting born brings the heart into the sense-world; so it gets affected by sense-contact, or, more accurately, by the mental interpretations (or ‘perceptions’, saññā) of sense-contact. In this case, we see, hear, smell or taste something – and the mind perceives it as attractive or repugnant. Dependent on that perception, impulses arise. These impulses are a leading feature of a mental formation and, as we know, they send a shot of energy through the body. With shock or delight or even wavering, embodied energies shift. Thus cittasaṅkhāra conditions kāyasaṅkhāra. These impulses generate patterns of energy that if not integrated or resolved, get embedded in the nervous system. So, if the energetic effects of the shock or loss or abuse that occur in anyone’s life aren’t discharged, areas of numbness, hypersensitivity, tension or overactivity develop. Consequently, as the citta tends to lock onto any emotional and embodied impressions, hindrances arise.

The hindrances are summarized as sense-desire (kāmacchanda), aversion (byāpāda), mental stiffness and lethargy (thīna-middha), restlessness and flurry (uddhacca-kukkucca), and a loss of confidence (vicikicchā) – although they may well manifest in conglomerate mixes.

To flesh this last piece out: the hindrances manifest as thoughts and emotions that hobble the mind and lead to a lack of confidence. This is a syndrome that arrests enthusiasm for practice, and at its worst can plunge the mind into meaninglessness and depression. There’s much that can be said about the hindrances, but all advice has to contain the instruction to unfasten attention from engagement with the topics that support them: thoughts and emotions associated with sense-pleasure, ill-will or needless speculation. One therefore trains the manas faculty to step out of such attitudes and at the same time refrain from judging oneself by, or getting fixated on, these defects. Instead, we learn to disengage and see the bigger picture – in the light of birth, death and liberation, how valuable is the quick hit, how valid is the growling grudge or the sniping accusation? And when we come into the certainty of the present – what is important about being alive? If mental habits based on distraction, gratification and hostility are starting to shape your life, it’s high time to loosen their grip. Just this loosening up of locked stuff such as grievances, addictions, self-hatred and despond is one of the main reasons to meditate. It may well be an ongoing requirement. Fortunately, the release from these states can be experienced.

Other than the wise reflection outlined above, you can also apply counteractive mind-states: a sense of value and dignity to replace sense-desire; of goodwill and acceptance to counteract ill-will; of urgency in the face of mortality in order to shake off mental stiffness and lethargy; of embodiment to give firm ground to neutralize restlessness; and of awareness based on that firm ground in order to clear the spin of doubt and anxiety. Tackling the hindrances can bring forth great compassion, understanding and strength.

##### Support from the body

The hindrances can’t be dispelled by reasoning alone. This is because, like any addiction, they have an embodied grip. If you attend to how they affect your body, you’ll notice the reactive surge of sense-desire, the hardening of ill-will, the stagnation of the dull mind, the agitated instability of worry and the whirling spiral of doubt. As their mental aspects arise, such ‘hindrance forms’ manifest in the embodied field as tangles or flares of energy. You can even name them, the way that people name hurricanes. The Buddha likened them to the turbulence or slime that can take over a pond of bright water (S.46:55). Such analogies make these reflexes less topical and personal. However, the question is: how to relate to and dispel them without getting tangled up?

This point is the function of right mindfulness: the ability to be with an experience but not involved with it. In terms of breath meditation, manas places the loop of mindfulness around the experience of breathing to shield it, and support its ‘body’ as it grows. Thus there can arise a continuum of vitality and grounded energy that can ward off the hindrances. Breathing can also be directed to flow through the body’s nervous system to flush out the currents of the hindrances in the same way that a great and steady river will capture the erratic flow of a stream.

To fortify the breath-energy, keep returning to the breathing, crucially to the rest-potential in the pause phase of the breathing. This is the point where energy turns from activation into rest-potential, and it’s where the kāyasaṅkhāra can release – along with compulsive psychological reflexes. In anatomical terms, this opening effect is most clearly discernible in the palms and soles or any open point in the body, such as the heart, temples, or forehead. So, lingering in that open point through the slowing-down pause phase, widen your field of attention and calm your attitudes to go against the constricting effect of the hindrances. Avoid mentally engaging with your agitation or despond, and instead, as the breathing picks up again, spread this quiet energy over and through the form of the hindrance. The exhalations will tend to discharge the distorted energy of the hindrance, and the inhalations will refresh and rebuild one’s state of mind.

To give an example: say I am experiencing agitation over something or the other. I could mentally review the topic, consider that I am not in control of other people or the turn of events, step back and look after my own peace of mind. Furthermore, especially as there are plenty of sources of restlessness and worry, I could acknowledge that my heart has to skilfully respond to this rather than follow it. I may direct some goodwill in all directions, or focus on a topic that gladdens and comforts. At some stage, I might also address the embodied underpinnings of this phenomenon; that is, not try to get rid of it or change my reactions, but handle them with a compassionate regard for how my system has been conditioned: it gets nervous, it feels insecure, it wants stability. So I meet such phenomena in the body.

This is like encountering an animal in the woods. I have to go quietly and with focus. How does this feel in my body? Is it buzzy, spinning, prickling, tightening? Can I step back from that, not get involved with it, and find a more grounded and open area of my body and feel the breathing there? With some careful attention, I can. So I encourage the mind to disengage; and as it shifts to a more spacious mode, I widen attention to include a steadily increasing area of my body, and even include the space around it. I can then wrap that wider, softer awareness around the form of the hindrance and capture its energy. My breathing may lengthen, or even become slightly erratic as it encompasses and transmutes the energy of the hindrance, but in time it settles. As it does, I feel brighter, stronger, and my ‘inner space’ feels wide and clear.

So in meeting and resolving a hindrance, I not only clear an obstruction, but also experience significant gains. Although life will continue to be problematic, if there is a clear and strong embodied presence, problems won’t get under my skin and offer afflictions room to breed. With this increased confidence and clarity, I can then review the trigger of my agitation or ill-will (etc.), and by seeing it with dispassion, erase the sense of ‘me’ being attacked, belittled, or insecure, that was at the heart of my reactivity.

In outline, this is how calm supports insight, and how the body can serve as a resource for the mind. Because when we meet, steady and calm bodily energy, we can meet, steady and resolve heart energy. The heart learns to be sensitive, firm, but non-reactive. This is a huge development.

Here’s a checklist on this aspect of the meditative process:

Acknowledge any sense of imbalance: its pattern may be compulsive, fruitlessly repetitive, and constrictive. Notice the thoughts and emotions that accompany that, and see if you can drop them.

If they can’t be dispelled or put aside, investigate how and where they affect your body.

Find an area or aspect of your embodied state that isn’t being negatively affected. Linger there. Can you sense any effect associated with breathing?

When your heart has absorbed the steadying effect of this, extend this replenished awareness to cover the afflicted area, maintaining a sense of inquiry.