# 1 – Breathing is Life

This book began as an essay to add some guiding notes to the practice of mindfulness of breathing (ānāpānasati1). The intention was to be concise, with the understanding that plenty of meditation manuals are available, as are several thorough expositions of the theory and practice of mindfulness of breathing. However, as this meditation is so crucial, it seems useful to contribute any fresh approaches. And I have noticed that the way I understand and approach mindfulness of breathing is both somewhat different from what I was originally taught, and yet can fit the original sutta presentation.

I was introduced to meditation in 1975 through a systematic approach of maintaining moment-by-moment mindfulness of the sensations associated with breathing. I found that approach to be useful for discipline, but quite intense and demanding, and not conducive to joy and ease. Moreover, when I looked into the original texts, I found that they didn’t mention awareness of physical sensations, nor of mindfulness as a practice of tracking sensations a moment at a time – though these references are plausible interpretations of ‘mindfully one knows one is breathing in … breathing out.’ But, as an exploration, I went back to the basics of noticing how I was aware of breathing, and picked up on the fluid rhythm of the life force that the physical act of breathing moves and moderates. The Pali word for this is ‘pāṇa’. This is the energy, rather than the sensations, associated with breathing. This aspect of the breath as an energy is commonly acknowledged in the spiritual traditions of India and China, as well as in non-mechanist cultures – so it seems reasonable to assume that it informed the meditative process that the Buddha outlined. The significant point is that this embodied energy connects the material to the mental realm. Embodied energy runs through the stirring, stress, calm and gladdening of our entire nervous system: if it’s distorted, it inflames and corrupts the mind; if it’s healthy, it clears it. Accordingly, a trained focus on the energy associated with breathing offers a means to calm, brighten, understand and clear states of mind (and heart).

If this seems unusual, note that in the Buddha’s discourses there is no mention of maintaining a one-pointed focus on any particular physical feature of the body. On the other hand, focusing on the energy associated with a living body does fulfil instructions such as ‘thoroughly and fully sensitive to the entire body’ and ‘calming the bodily formation.’ And it brings around the bodily ease that mindfulness of breathing is said to lead to. Discourses in the collection on ānāpānasati (Ānāpānasati Saṃyutta, S.54) add remarks such as ‘neither my body nor my eyes become fatigued’ (S.54:8) and ‘no shaking or trembling occurs in the body, and no shaking or trembling occurs in the mind’ (S.54:7) when cultivating this meditation. This is not suggestive of an intense drive, but of accessing an ease that is felt in the body, so that ‘my mind, by not clinging, was liberated from the taints.’ (S.54:8) References such as these support the view that the aspect of the body that is being focused on is its autonomic nervous system – where the reflexes that trigger our emotions and mind-states occur. (Getting irritated, defensive or inspired is a reflex, not a decision.) As an extension, ‘bodily formation’ would refer to the weave of embodied energies that are conducted through connective tissue and calmed through breathing. (You may know this if you practise hatha yoga or qi gong, which maps the weave in terms of ‘nadis’ and ‘meridians’.) Approached in this way, breathing provides a path to the refreshment and soothing of body and mind; this effect encourages one to persevere with meditation without a huge amount of willpower.

This is a pragmatic approach: the vitality and ease that a settled body can bring can lift the mind out of oppressive emotional and psychological obstructions. It also brings around a greater degree of grounded stability. This has far-reaching significance: with an increase in hyperactive mentality, attention disorders, psychological breakdowns and social dysfunction, as well as a disregard for the natural world, society in general has become disembodied and groundless. This condition speaks of an urgent need to get aligned with the subtle and life-enhancing aspects of our material reality. In the microcosm of our own bodies, ānāpānasati offers this.

The discourses describe the ongoing cultivation that leads through samādhi to liberation as being based on recollecting virtue and thereby feeling uplifted. So the ethical clarity of right view is the foundation, the guiding principle for what one should be mindful of and with what intent. This right mindfulness settles on the gladness of the heart and lets that steady to bring around bodily ease. It’s a flowing process, rather than a push to get concentrated. (See, for example, A.10:2, where the development is described as ‘one stage flows into the next.’) The stage in that process wherein mental and bodily energies settle and consolidate is called ‘samādhi’. This is an experience that the standard English translation ‘concentration’ does not adequately cover; samādhi is a firm abiding in ease that serves as the platform for clear seeing and liberation.

##### Meditation begins with letting go

To introduce the practice: If you disengage your attention from any particular object or topic, but remain attentive, you’ll probably notice certain fundamental qualities, even if these are only a backdrop to the streams of thought that swirl through your mind. These qualities aren’t bound up with circumstance and hence are more stable: they include the vitality, solidity and warmth that tell you you have a body – along with a non-verbal awareness of that embodied condition. If you settle into that matrix, you’ll likely become aware of the rhythm of breathing. That is, the overall flow. Being involuntary, it is restful; being rhythmic, it attracts attention and is soothing.

Just settling into this for five or ten minutes can be a relief and offer a perspective on one’s current preoccupations. And yet … you’ll notice that the mind will rarely stay with breathing for long; it gets driven to memories and speculation, to irritation and longing, to recrimination and anxiety. Why one doesn’t relax for long is because there are underlying tendencies and issues that come to the surface when other circumstances calm down. So meditation, like life in general, isn’t just about relaxing: in line with the teachings, one has to ‘train’ – guidance is needed. On the other hand, too much control restricts embodiment and strains the mind.

Keeping your awareness in touch with breathing offers a middle way between doing too much – or too little. Too much mental doing blocks receptivity and compresses the energy of breathing. ‘Doing too little’ means one isn’t maintaining a responsive supervision and encouragement of the process. Although breathing is involuntary – and hence brings its steady and pervasive energy to bear on our impulses – that energy can be refined and directed. Then reactions and attachments over which we seem to have no control, and which thinking is unable to check or dispel, can be penetrated at their roots, and released through the direct insight that this process facilitates. As I’ve said before, this takes skill – and time – but what makes it manageable is that it is an approach based on pleasure. And as you’ll see in this sutta (and elsewhere), the Buddha encourages a pleasure based on steadying and being sensitive to body and heart.

In my opinion, returning to the root discourses in order to ponder and practise in accord with what they do and don’t say, is a wise approach. For example, the Buddha was adamant that in using ānāpānasati for awakening, one needed to fulfil this practice in line with the instructions that he gave2.

This discourse is the record of a teaching that he offered to an assembly of bhikkhus who had been earnestly cultivating several other meditations for an unbroken four-month session. But this wasn’t the only time or place: in other places (A.9:3; A.10:60), the Buddha mentions ānāpānasati among a list of practices that includes the contemplation of the unattractive aspects of the body, and the sending-forth of loving-kindness. On one occasion, he specifically advocated ānāpānasati as an antidote to wayward thinking (A.9:3).

Having said this much, I have to add that I don’t see the pursuit of ānāpānasati as something that a beginner can fulfil without other forms of mind-cultivation. It is not a matter of doggedly fixing attention on the breath – this approach can actually intensify rather than correct mental imbalances. Wisely used, ānāpānasati comprises one theme in a mental cultivation that should encourage ethical orientation, careful attention, goodwill – and a turning away from worldly aims and values. Guiding mental behaviour in line with these themes, one can return to in- and out-breathing over the years as a regular meditation practice. Certainly, cultivate spacious awareness; relax goal-orientation and self-criticism – yes, of course. But the cultivation of breathing as pāṇa within a safe and grounded embodiment offers something to come back to and work at; it will be a practice that is enriched by all the skills that you cultivate. If practised even for five or ten minutes, it is a key to alleviating tension, hyperactivity, overwhelm and fatigue. As breathing is universal, mindfulness of it doesn’t require adopting any view or philosophical standpoint. On the contrary, I’d say that it causes views to fade out – other than that of how suffering and stress can come to an end. And that is a fitting and universal aim.

All books have limitations, and when such a book focuses on any single theme within the Buddha’s teachings, that means that it sidelines many other important themes, such as the roles of kindness, generosity and ethics. I’ve also been brief on guidance on dealing with hindrances and other obstacles, with the feeling that such guidance can be found elsewhere, and is often given directly by one’s teacher. For this reason – and that, as people’s minds differ, I don’t see how any book or any one approach can be adequate – I’ve limited the scope of this book to one of offering a guide to this one practice rather than a thorough exposition on mind-cultivation.

Notwithstanding these limitations, may this text be a source of guidance for your life and liberation!

##### How to use this book

The ensuing text presents a series of sections that alternate between explorations of the sixteen steps of ānāpānasati, and considerations of complementary themes. These considerations may appear theoretical and abstract at times, but they can clarify points about the language or about the traditional interpretations that have accumulated around this form of meditation. (And you can put them aside for later if you wish.) Views differ, and the reader is invited to consider mine as she or he sees fit. The sixteen steps themselves are universally referred to (with minor differences) by all Buddhist traditions, and are grouped into four clusters of four instructions each. These clusters are called ‘tetrads’.

The first three tetrads work through calming and refining body, mental formation and mind/heart, whereas the fourth gives instructions on witnessing or ‘insight’. I have structured the exploration of the text so that the insight instructions of the fourth tetrad (the chapters labelled ‘Insight’) are related to each of the preceding three tetrads after the teachings on that tetrad have concluded. This means that the practice of insight is explained for each of these in turn. I’ll explain this more fully in the next chapter.

As different translators use different English words to translate the Pali of the texts, I have added the Pali terms to provide consistency. I have used standard translations in order to avoid confusing the reader, but although the term ‘citta’ is normally translated as ‘mind’, I have often used ‘heart’ in the body of the text for reasons that are explained. (You can bear both words in mind, though ‘awareness’ becomes the paramount feature by which one knows the calm and steady citta.) Another key word, ‘saṅkhāra’, is rendered in many ways, but I have used a common translation, ‘formations’, and explained what this refers to as the instructions unfold. I have, however, replaced ‘he/his’ wherever it isn’t needed with the gender-neutral ‘one/one’s’.

1. This term is also written as ānāpānassati, but in this case I have followed the version in the majority of the English language texts.

2. S.54:6 records an occasion when Bhikkhu Arittha reports practising mindfulness of breathing free from sense-desire and ill-will – and yet receives a gentle correction from the Buddha, who instructs him in the sixteen-step instruction.