# 9 – Insight: Embodied Freedom

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing changeability’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing changeability.’

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing dispassion’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing dispassion.’

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing cessation’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing cessation.’

One trains: ‘breathe in witnessing relinquishment’; one trains: ‘breathe out witnessing relinquishment.’

##### Calm and insight

So far in this presentation, the teaching has been aimed at steadying and soothing the body, and bringing around a harmonious relationship between this living creature and the (socially and personally) conditioned mind. All this supports samatha, the practice of steadying and soothing the citta.

The other aspect of meditation – ‘insight’ or ‘vipassanā’ – focuses on witnessing phenomena. It is the inquiring view that arises from questions like: ‘What is this experience established on?’ and ‘From what basis does this attitude arise?’ and ‘Contact with what gives rise to this response?’ Insight is the clear seeing that can arise when the mind is calm; it is made possible by samatha.

Speaking directly, samatha (which is an extension of the principles of restraint and goodwill) allows you to maintain a steady focus on your chosen meditation theme. Then, when you don’t have to keep extracting your attention from obsessive thoughts or soothing frayed emotions, you can look into the nature of experience at some depth. With reference to the hindrances, this means that one’s attention won’t be chasing images of sensuality, revisiting grudges and phobias, sinking into a dull and stagnant state, restlessly fidgeting or feeling hopeless and inadequate. The triggers for the hindrances may still arise, but when the mind has the strong anchor of samatha to stop it from tipping over, these pushes and spins can be reviewed insightfully. Then you can look into what conditions, thoughts, attitudes or assumptions support hindrances, and what causes them to disband; or you can do the same with the factors of awakening. When your mind and heart are steadied by the skills of Dhamma practice, you have the capacity to notice that the hindrances are aroused and supported by a habitual interpretation of sights, sounds and the rest – including ideas and mental creations. We can get dazzled or enraged by opinions, thrown off-kilter by a memory, and be habitually searching for security in plans and dogmas.

##### Name, form and the end of old stories

This interpretative process is summed up as nāma, ‘name’, and it is linked to rūpa or ‘form’ in a functioning consciousness (viññāṇa). In detail, this ‘name’ consists of five factors: intention/impulse (cetanā), attention (manasikāra), contact (phassa), perception (saññā) and feeling (vedanā). This means that the eye sees (i.e. there is visual consciousness), attention registers a form, and as the mind perceives that form, the impression that has arisen makes contact with the heart. There the impression is felt as a thing ‘out there’, be it a person or an animal, or whatever – and based on the impression, the sign (nimitta) of ill-will, anxiety, gratitude or affection arises in the citta. This sign triggers an intention to meet, avoid or otherwise respond to that thing. That process is nāma.

The problem is firstly that perceptions are subject to bias; and secondly, that one’s mind becomes a very full library of interpretations and signs – so full that we don’t see things afresh, as they really are. Living in a library gets stuffy, even if the books are good. And most people’s libraries have pulp fiction in them. But based on a biased perception and a reactive impulse, there is projection, confusion and suffering. Full liberation is therefore equated with breaking the compulsive link between name and form. That may sound painful, but what it means is that experience is not just a recycling narrative with its episodes of horror and anguish.

How this break-up comes around is through insight. Insight focuses on certain key characteristics of all conditioned experience: that it is subject to change, that it is unsatisfactory and that it does not occur to, or create, a person. When meditation provides an increasing ability to disengage from nāma, one can witness perceptions and signs, associated mental feeling, and the compulsive inner narrative that arises from them in the light of these characteristics. This reduces the passion that acts as the habitual link between a thing, event, inner or outer experience and our interpretation of it. With increasing dispassion, that link can cease. Furthermore, signs can be abandoned.

This is quite a process, involving as it does the entirety of one’s experience. But if you can work it out where it arises, then you sever the root. Here we’re taking the experience of a breathing body as that basis. As I’ve explained earlier, this is where the reactive flushes and contractions rise up and bind – and here is where they come undone.

##### Changeability brings letting go

This is great, because the aspect of conditioned experience that is easiest to observe is that of form as it arises in bodily terms. So, as we’re directly experiencing the body, we’re witnessing it in line with changeability (anicca). For example, one could experience body as a matrix of sensations and elemental properties (solidity, caloricity, motility and cohesiveness) – and witness any and all of this as a changeable experience. Even the visual impression we have of a body changes dependent on what angle we see it from and in terms of what criteria; and its appearance changes with time anyway. The tactile form of the body is also variable in terms of hardness or softness, moistness or dryness, smoothness or roughness (compare the inside of your wrist with the sole of your foot). So we can experience a body in many ways, and they’re all bound to change. But the most changeable aspect of the body by far is its energy. This is a continuum of pulses and flows, with the occasional jolt, shift or surge. So when one trains the mind, one trains it to witness this most quintessential aspect of body: the very movement of the life force as it is regulated and calmed through ānāpānasati.

When this aspect of bodily experience is steadied and soothed, then the passion and prickliness of bodily instinct doesn’t trigger sense-desire and ill-will. Stagnant or unsettled energy can be noted, managed and ameliorated rather than produce lethargy or restlessness. Then the body and heart feel comfortable. Consequently, the groundlessness of the thinking mind doesn’t destroy confidence: the insightful practitioner knows that thinking is not going to provide certainty, so they don’t depend on it. When one addresses the energies of body, heart and mind, one feels steady and assured – even in the face of uncertainty and discomfort.

Training in this way reduces reactivity and clears habitual assumptions; you get to experience things as they really are. Even with regard to your body, this is liberating, because however you experience your body, and whatever perceptions, anxieties or concerns you have about its form, with insight you realize that ‘the body’ is really a flow of changeable bodily factors arising in awareness. Whether the flow is of sensation, perception, or energy, it’s not a solid thing; and, as you are aware of it, it can’t be a true subject – ‘me’, ‘myself’. All of which is going to make a non-issue out of your hair, or your figure – at least from your own point of view. This is a good direction; it sets your focus with regard to the body to something more valuable: your calm, clear embodied awareness. The heart gets off the hooks associated with bodily appearance.

Furthermore, as the instruction on dispassion highlights, when the perception of changeability is firmly established, you’ll become more serene with regard to discomfort, sickness, and high and low energies. Dispassion is not about becoming cold or averse, but is a freedom from being fascinated or rocked by the ups and downs in bodily experience – because you know how to open the body and mind to allow things to pass. And this is wise: getting upset or excited about bodily experience only stirs up energies and challenges mental stability; these emotions take you to a negative state. So, as your mindfulness handles bodily impressions in the light of changeability, nāma signs, such as ‘old’, or ‘attractive’, or ‘vibrant’, or ‘feeble’ don’t penetrate the heart and become an identity. Aspects of your familiar way of describing your body – your perceptions, and assessments – stop. There’s nothing much to say about the body, because there’s no ‘it’ anymore: what you experience is materiality going through change.

The effect of this growing dispassion is cessation. That is, interpretive programs that might include anxiety or vanity regarding one’s body, or comparing it with other people’s, or fantasizing over the body of someone else, are seen through. Therefore, the citta doesn’t get entangled with them and give them energy. So they cease. And if such programs cease, the mind doesn’t grasp at bodily conditions. The sense of being, owning, or otherwise firming up a mental impression of the body, ceases – along with the sense: ‘this is me, this is mine, this is my self’. And when that bias ceases, that’s a weight off the mind.

Even holding onto a positive impression of the body hinders liberation, because it rests on a shaky basis: ‘my body’ depends on a fixed mode of attention on characteristics of shape and size with their accompanying signs. And these characteristics will change. So, if this sign, the sign of change, is focused on, a release from the signs associated with visual contact can be experienced. Furthermore, the perception of being someone encased in a material form can fall away. Embodied awareness is free to know and be itself.

All this amounts to a relinquishment. If you’ve done this much, you’ve already dropped a lot of potential stress; but when your practice can penetrate mental behaviour and the mind itself, then it is complete. This then is what the ensuing instructions lead on through.