# 14 – Insight: Deconstructing Reactions and Habits

This is peaceful, this is sublime – that is the stilling of all saṅkhāra, the relinquishment of all attachments [upadhi], the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.

(M.64:9)

##### Habits create the person

As we maintain watchfulness over the mind, we come to realize how compulsive and habitual our mental behaviour can be. ‘Here I am again getting indignant about other people, getting captured by the sight of food, erupting with turbulent thinking – and disliking myself for it.’ These irrational and compulsive forms of mental behaviour are cittasaṅkhārā. Triggered by perceptions and feeling that arise with contact, launching intentions and impulses, and given specific aim by attention, cittasaṅkhāra is the conditioning force that forms ‘me in a world’ based on the platform that consciousness provides.

To review some of these factors in detail: intention, the energy that accompanies each impulse, goes fast or slow, meanders and vacillates, or shoots like an arrow. We can recognize ‘quick-fire’ or ‘wavering’ or ‘half-hearted’ or ‘headstrong’ as palpable characteristics of inclination/intention. Attention, or focus, adds shape to that: we can recognize narrow or broad, sharp or soft focuses. Attention and intention are moderated by contact. For example, with contact being how things ‘strike’ you, the impression of a person, based on their gestures, or tone of voice, is learnt, and then stored as the basis for our friendly or defensive inclinations towards them.

Perception – my ‘take’ on a thing, person or event – is the trigger for mental action. It is the labelling that familiarizes and categorizes experience: a four-legged woolly animal is (probably) a ‘sheep’. Therefore, we place that particular creature in a ‘sheep’ category, and expect certain behaviours (and shagginess). This categorization does, however, set up the stress of comparing how a thing or a person (including oneself) is, with the stored perception of how they should be.

It’s easier to see things in line with our past knowledge and perceptual prejudices than to see things afresh. The lure of the familiar is that it makes our responses easy, even automatic. And this offers a seemingly secure basis; my sense of self is cradled by familiar perceptions and automatic responses. I can even take a stand on them. Say I am intrigued by the body language and flock instincts of sheep, while others see them as rather stupid creatures: I can form myself as a ‘sheep-expert’ and judge others as ‘sheep-ignorant’. Thus attachment to perceptions and responses generates a basis for ‘I am’; this is another saṅkhāra – ahaṃkāra – and with that comes the potential for discord.

Nevertheless, the Buddha and the arahants were able to orient to, and handle, perception with skill and without stress, because they had relinquished this ‘I am’ construction. Perception can be known as a perception and not held onto. This doesn’t entail a descent into inaction, impotence or meaninglessness, but quite the contrary. The mind can be clearly and intelligently perceptive, but not running on automatic. This encourages us to consider that of all conditioned forces, it is the ‘I am’, with its compulsions and fixed positions, that is to be, and can be, turned off. To summarize, a wise penetration of cittasaṅkhāra enables release through revealing where and how compulsive habits generate a position, how that becomes a self – and how all this can be uprooted to allow more enlightened responses to arise.

##### Undoing the ‘I am’

The abolition of ‘I am’ hinges on penetrating saṅkhārā. But first one has to settle their more obviously troublesome aspects in order to gain access to their roots. Because if we’re always tangling with personal issues, attachments, judgements and phobias, then we don’t penetrate to the source of ‘I am’. So we cultivate a steady, embodied basis to get a handle on our anxiety or obsessiveness – because thinking about them just adds more person-forming saṅkhārā to the mix. However, take note: volatile citta formations – your personal stuff with its fault lines and upheavals – form a gate to liberation. If you can turn the key, that is. And the key is to disengage from and to meet the cittasaṅkhāra in the embodied domain. There you can undo self-construction as it happens.

Undoing ‘I am’ begins with meditative self-improvement. This means carefully lifting that improvement program out of the sensory domain and into the heart. Reflecting on the brevity of the happiness that sight, taste, touch and sound can provide lessens one’s interest in consumer pursuits and entertainment; remembering our mortality causes us to prioritize heart-values and freedom from attachment. These reflections channel our cittasaṅkhāra, and its self-interest, in transformative ways.

On top of this, with mindfulness of breathing we gather attention on the embodied process and keep the mind from straying into notions and opinions. This consolidates the energy of heart and mind and adjusts its drives; a steady focus on calming perceptions replaces the ever-shifting attention and short-term reward of the social norm. In this way, attention and intention, the mental factors that direct one’s focus, impulses and responses, begin to consolidate around a source of intimate comfort that’s not about ‘me’ and ‘mine’. This re-shapes the citta.

This consequent mode of experience, whereby the heart becomes firm and imbued with clarity and subtle pleasure, is samādhi. In this condition, as cittasaṅkhāra unifies with the kāyasaṅkhāra, the heart isn’t tuning into the social, person-creating world; and yet the experience is enjoyable and nourishing. But in itself, samādhi is only a temporary step out of the personal world – and one can even make a personal achievement out of that state. So what’s more significant is the perspective that samādhi provides, one whereby the underlying reflex and view ‘I am’ can be directly felt. The heart gets active, and tightens up as it takes on attitudes of gaining and wishes to hold on – and what shapes up is a world ‘out there’ and a ‘me’ and ‘mine’ ‘in here’. It’s good to study that process as a formation, rather than as a self. This is what insight practice is about.

The self-formation reflex kicks in even though its ‘I am’ has no solid basis; it perches now on a body, now a mood, then an idea, a wish and so on. All of which change and are unreliable. So the ‘selfing’ process and its disbanding are therefore hinge points for insight-liberation. As the Buddha teaches: ‘… someone who hasn’t heard Dhamma … regards form as self …. Even if they don’t regard form as self or self as possessing form, they regard form as in self … self as in form. That regarding is a formation …. [This analysis is then repeated by substituting ‘form’ for ‘feeling’, ‘perception’, ‘formations’ and ‘consciousness’.] That regarding is a formation …. When one knows and sees thus, bhikkhus, the immediate destruction of the āsavā occurs.’ (S.22:81)

So, how to turn that hinge? As the very act of regarding has a formative effect, mindfulness is crucial, because its reflective reference turns away from ‘I am’ and attends instead to the skilful or unskilful basis of the current mind-state. What follows on is insight-wisdom, whereby alert knowing (sampajāno) is directed to the changeable nature of formations and the results of engaging them. This clear seeing of changeability ripens into dispassion (why get stirred up if this will change?), and this facilitates letting go. The relinquishment of the ‘I am’ habit follows on from there.

##### Attend to change

Insightful witnessing means that even as we get the mind into a relatively stable state, we then contemplate that this very state has arisen, is subject to change, and is affected by agreeable but changeable perceptions and feelings. And we’re alert to any aims or attitudes that attach to these: conditions change and can’t be made solid, so any sense of ownership, even to the extent of having a definite idea of the future, creates holding on and stress. And as the stress that comes with this habit is realized, there is a growing dispassion. With steady attention and dispassion regarding cittasaṅkhāra, there can be a ceasing of the idea that I have or need or am anything – even this mental state. This is because the mind feels so firmly grounded and clear in itself that it doesn’t need to hold onto conditions for support. That confused view and its insecure basis can be relinquished.

Even though one may get the idea, insight isn’t theoretical: the reality of the practice is that the qualities of attachment have to stand out and be directly sensed before they can be dismantled by wisdom. And for that scenario to come to be, there needs to be both a steady mode of mind that these agitations and stresses stand out from, and an awareness that is keen enough to discern and withdraw energy from them. This is provided by the rightly concentrated citta.

This concentration is not the kind we’d use when concentrating on a problem or an object with fixed boundaries; such activity brings a narrowing of attention and an orientation of intention to solve, engage with, or acquire, something. As intention and attention are both saṅkhārā, this has a formative effect on the mind – and even on the body. And one should be careful about how one’s mind gets shaped. Does the notion and view ‘I am meditating’ make me obsessive? Does it bring around bodily tension? Can I feel open and yet undisturbed? When one’s mindfulness is immersed in the energy of breathing, the answer is ‘yes’ – because that energy is a condition that supports all mental and bodily activity: it’s always accessible.

Mindfulness grants that access. Note that in the discourses, the Buddha doesn’t refer to concentrating on the breath, but to being mindful of breathing. And as breathing is a fluid process, one’s focus has to be open yet collected; attention isn’t pinned down but is attuned to the changing nature of the experience. The intention that fits is receptive rather than goal-oriented: one is sensitive to the entire body and so on, rather than concentrating on the breath. In the Ānāpānasati Sutta, a reference to samādhi doesn’t even occur until the third tetrad, whereupon the instruction is that one steadies, unifies, ‘concentrates’ (or ‘collects’, or ‘consolidates’) the citta. That is, one gathers the heart into the purity that mindfulness has distilled; so it’s not that one concentrates on any object, but that mindfulness concentrates mind (or heart).1

##### Beyond internal and external

Because samādhi provides a base for the citta that isn’t dependent on sense-contact, your experience of presence changes. Sense-contact, with its perceptions and feeling tones, gives rise to the impression of being a constant entity ‘in this body’ – when actually what arises and passes are pleasant and unpleasant feelings that affect bodily formations/energies or mental formations/energies. In terms of citta, there’s no ‘in’ or ‘out’. Naturally, sensations and energies are interpreted as belonging to a body; however, it’s also the case that with bodily damage, it’s possible to feel a severed limb. And it is equally possible to not feel the organs and even areas of an intact body. As for the heart, and the formative effect of perception and feeling – that too depends on what the mindis focused on. The logic of samādhi then is to steer and refine mental consciousness so that its experience is not based on sense-data, but on subtler levels of perception, originating from disengagement and sustained by the wholesome energy of the embodied mind. These subtler levels are called ‘jhāna’ (absorption); they are levels of samādhi wherein the sense of inner and outer is subdued or even eliminated. More on that later.

Although it is possible to establish the view that ‘I am a boundless and luminous being’ (!) dependent on such states, the truer purpose is to use them to lift attention, contact and therefore inclination out of the sensory domain. So one inclines towards dispassion with regard to sense-contact and what it brings. As for what remains – qualities of perception and feeling – these are to be reviewed insightfully as conditioned by this acquired state, not lasting and hence not-self. This is peaceful, this is sublime.

1. The phrase ‘object of concentration’ does appear in the suttas, but this ‘object’ means the theme that one is using to arrive at concentration, or, as in ‘with release as object’, the result that one is inclining towards.