# 5 – Direct Knowing

Breathing in long, one directly knows: ‘breathing in long’; or breathing out long, one directly knows: ‘breathing out long’.

Breathing in short, one directly knows: ‘breathing in short’; or breathing out short, one directly knows: ‘breathing out short’.

##### Instructions

Cultivate lightly but clearly placing your attention on points in your body and sensing how they feel.

Acknowledge tense or numb places and widen your attention to include them within the wider frame of bodily reference. Be especially attentive around your face – if the forehead, temples and eye-sockets can be relaxed, thinking will lessen and the body will be more at ease.

Review bodily phenomena as arising within the field of awareness.

Refer to and encourage the unconstricted process of breathing.

Stay mindfully in touch with the breathing as it lengthens out of constrictions and gradually shortens with calm.

Enjoy.

##### The embodied sense and direct knowing

We know that the body has a nervous system that registers tension, relaxation, safety and shock to a refined degree. However, as becomes evident in instances of love, anxiety, depression, joy and grief, the body has an innate relationship to the mind, and to what happens to it. This aspect of the body, its sensitive intelligence, is what I’m calling ‘the embodied sense’. (Technically, it’s called the peripheral nervous system, but I’ll spare you the jargon.) On account of this, mentally-derived phenomena get registered in terms of bodily uplift, ease or tension and contraction – and they can get stuck there long after the mental trigger has disappeared. The relationship of emotion and attitude to body is the key to understanding the relevance of mindfulness of body as a path to liberation. That is, just as mental suffering and stress get embedded in the body, through the body runs the path to their release. Moreover, through directly knowing your embodied condition, you can read suffering and stress, its arising and its ceasing: ‘… there is no making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world. Yet it is just within this fathom-long body, with its perception and conceiving mind, that I declare that there is the world, the arising of the world, the cessation of the world, and the path of practice leading to the cessation of the world.’ (A.4:45)

Directly knowing (pajānāti) isn’t knowing about something; it’s a non-conceptual and sensitive clarity. The distinction between directly knowing and conceptualizing (maññati) causes us to reset our understanding of ‘mind’. In the teachings of the Buddha, there are two words that are translated as ‘mind’ – manas and citta (pronounced ‘chitta’). Manas, the conceiver, creates a mental object (‘that patch of colour is a dog/a car/a play of light’). Its action is ‘attention’ (manasikāra); attention creates a focus, a boundary within the field of sensory data that isolates an area of sight (sound and so on) from the rest of the visual field. Thus an ‘object’ arises.

Citta, on the other hand, refers to the seat of impulses, directives, sensed or intuited experience, greed, hatred, compassion, imagination, aspiration – and liberation. Citta provides the subjective reference ‘I feel like this’, ‘that affects me in this way’, ‘this is happening to me’. To distinguish it from manas, I’ll call it ‘heart’ – although as it quietens and stabilizes, ‘awareness’ fits citta better.

Manas deals with abstractions such as measurements, possibilities, conventions, ideals and organization. These are representations of what is, or might be, or has happened – and in this respect, if manas is free from bias or delusion, it serves us through integrating what has been immediately, presently sensed into a knowledge that can be stored and used later. Then it’s a source of guidance. But there is an ‘if’. Manas is by default tilted towards organizing the ever-fluctuating stream of sense-data and our impressions of that to form a cohesive world ‘out there’. It shapes and organizes what we attend to – but with the flooded input of modern life, and the pressure to organize and plan, it goes into a hyperactive mode. That brings stress into the heart and dulls receptivity.

##### Balance conceiving with sensing

The most significant object that manas creates is a notion of ‘myself’ that arises from measuring the changing feel, content and energy of citta. Citta feels – and it gets highly activated by the performance drive, the need to be better, and the fear of not being ‘good’ (attractive, smart, strong, effective) enough. Coupled with a low degree of loving acceptance, this self-conscious drive can play out as the need to be a ‘good’ meditator (resulting in a tense and fixated mindset). Manas locks this wavering subject into a notional self, an ‘I am’ that can’t be directly known (or released) because it is only a notion, a virtual reality. However, when this notion takes hold of the citta, it generates programs that can run your life: ‘I have to be strong, get ahead and hold on.’ Thus, the conceiving mind can pump out ideas and programs and haunt the heart with what could and shouldn’t be.

Because our idea of intelligence is biased towards the manas aspect of mind, we’ve learnt to render experience in terms of concepts, rather than directly sense how we’re affected – and conceiving has limited benefits. It’s great for organizing times and to-do lists, but it doesn’t touch into what can nourish us. With conceiving, direct experience gets translated into the virtual reality of concepts, and aims for the virtual reality of a conclusion; taken to excess, it throws your energy out of balance. So, if you’re thinking a lot, most likely there’s a tightness in the eyes, forehead and temples. This is because the energy of manas, ‘object-defining’ mind, also emphasizes and isolates the head as the base of attention and thereby creates an observing self in that part of the body. If we attend from this base, we practise ‘watching the breath’ (even though we can’t see it), and monitor it in a clockwork fashion rather than directly sensing it. Embodied intelligence thereby gets left out of its own process.

The unawakened citta is also inadequate on its own, because it gets tainted with self-centredness, whereby rather than float as a reference to what is volatile, stirring, gladdening or intoxicating, a ‘me’ sense anchors itself to views and preferences. Or sails into damaged territory or psychic energies. This also leads in the wrong direction, that of obsession.

As the citta is the ‘place’ where data lands, where contact happens and feeling gets generated, it’s the source of our responses, moment-to-moment inclinations and engaged intentions. When such mental activities are based on self-view, the citta is organized around personal needs – such as for security, or for happiness for ‘me’. Understandably so – that’s a major piece of conditioning. However, on account of that view, the citta easily activates in terms of fear, aversion and greed, and feels isolated; manas reads that and generates an isolated and needy ‘I am’ based on that. Embodied energy contracts, and the citta feels insecure.

On the other hand, if the object-defining mind is trained in terms of careful attention, mindfulness and investigation, it can point out that experience is actually a process of ongoing states and qualities, not a constant ‘I am’ at all. Although this reads like a recipe for chaos, the wisdom that reveals this truth of ‘not-self’ is grounded, reliable and dispassionate. So if manas is asked to simply record a natural, intimate experience (like breathing) … and if the citta is linked to something comfortable and freely arising (like breathing) … and if there is no pressure or competition in that process … liberation from the psychologies and stress of ‘I am’ is possible.

In this process, the guided embodied experience acts as a modifying reference for habitual mind-states. That is, in the presence of personal anxiety, or the compulsion to do something, manas can acknowledge how the body is being affected, then widen its attention to cover aspects of the body that are not anxious (such as the back, or the soles of the feet, or the out-breath). This soothes and balances body and mind.

In order to bring this about, one has to train the manas to connect to the embodied experience. You can do this by using a question about what you’re directly experiencing: for example, ‘How does the body do its breathing? And what is that like?’ Use this direct approach rather than an abstract speculation, such as ‘How can I get better at doing meditation?’ For its part, the citta should stay with right view and extend some steady goodwill. Then, as these heartful effects come into play, manas can stay on track with the breathing.

Over time, the breathing is likely to lengthen, or fully extend out of the contracted state – this is breathing ‘long’. Subsequently, as the energy starts flowing more smoothly, less energy is needed so the breathing shortens. But the energy remains bright. Meanwhile, as the energy field of the body has cleared and calmed, the impression of what the breathing and the body are will change. As a spoiler: they will be experienced as a source of pleasure that releases stress and supports awakening.

##### Practical details

###### Placing-and-sensing

It’s good to experiment with ways to apply and sustain mindfulness. You might do this by turning attention towards a part of your body and flagging it with one word – like ‘hand’, for example. This ‘placing’ of attention is vitakka, or ‘bringing to mind’. You may not need a word; vitakka is the pointing and placing of attention that is the precondition for thought. Its partner, vicāra, senses: it lingers, and takes in directly what vitakka has pointed out – in the case of ‘hand’, for example, that would be a range of sensations and degrees of warmth along with undertones of sensitivity. So the instruction is to think short (to place) and linger long (to sense) on what has been brought to mind – and thereby get the direct experience (rather than to think long, get complicated, lose receptivity, and arrive at an idea). At first, this conjoined pair may need to be cultivated as a sequence: first place the attention, and follow that with sensing and evaluating what you’ve placed it on. In time, these two will occur simultaneously, as with touching something lightly with a finger – you place and sense at the same time. And if you push too hard, you lose the receptivity. So use the mind like a finger, not like an eye.

You can then practise moving this receptive attention around your body, focusing on broad areas, on fine details, on vibrant centres, or on quiet, bony sections. Get the big picture of the territory. Learning to move your attention carefully is also an excellent training for heightening sensitivity. In this respect, the practice is about using the body as a workshop in which to train the mind.

You even get to reset what your body and mind are! If you compare your direct impression of this body to any idea or notion of it, you’ll notice that these two impressions are not the same. Your face probably feels larger than your chest – but it lacks a scalp, and the back of the skull. Much of the back of your body is probably quite faint, and has less sensation than occurs in one hand. Different elemental qualities may prevail at different times. So your directly-known body is a field of sensations and feelings that change … dependent on contact, attention and energy. Accordingly, you can get a fuller, more balanced and comfortable body if you cultivate attention and effort in a supportive way: relax, keep the aperture of attention steady but not intense, then deepen your awareness into what your attention tells you is there.

##### Awaken embodied response

Once you’ve sensed and attuned to the body’s responsiveness, bring up the suggestion, a kind of invitation, that your body could be more open and take up as much space as it likes. Practise this for a while, feeling into restricted areas and giving more attention to places like your lower back or sides that might not have much sensation. Also be aware of energy – a vibrancy or stirring that might be most obvious in the face or belly or around the centre of the chest.

This reference will also help you to sense where tension – stuck energy – lies. Any place where you discover tension will benefit from having a receptive awareness placed over it that then steadily widens to connect the tense place to a neighbouring non-tense area in the field of sensation and energy. (This might be at some distance in terms of anatomy: it could be, for example, that widening your attention to include the soles of your feet helps the lower belly to relax.) Don’t go into the tense area, and make no effort to abolish the tension; instead, the area needs to be welcomed to join the rest of the body. Allow the body to respond in its own time. It may be that some places are very tight, but anywhere that does release a little will improve the balance and ease of the body as a whole. So if you feel tight in your shoulders, scan around and note any area that is less tight (you might slowly extend to include your hands), and begin softening and widening wherever there is an opening. The effect of relaxing in a fully attentive way will transfer through the mind and heart.

Such practice will support the experience of breathing as a vibrant flow, with the out-breath slowly completing itself as if it’s emptying out. Allow it to come to a standstill so that the in-breath arises at its own time and rate. Similarly for the in-breath: don’t assume it’s finished because it slows down and the sensations wane. Stay with it into the pause. In fact, get interested in the process of breath-energy subsiding into and arising out of that pause phase – even if you don’t get much of a pause at first. This entire slowing down/pausing phase is associated with the relaxation of the will – which is a relief – but it may take time before the heart can allow embodied intelligence to take over. You might suggest to your body that it could breathe more slowly – but don’t work too hard at it. As a tip, the Buddha offered the analogy of holding a quail: hold it too tight and you kill it; hold it too loose and it flies away (M.128:22).

Another tip is to notice what approach encourages your citta to settle and become clear. You learn by the results. To illustrate this, the Buddha used the analogy of two cooks who each serve meals to a king (S.47:8). The foolish cook serves his master the king a meal, ‘doesn’t pick up the sign of his master’s preference’ – and serves the king the same food every day. The wise cook, on the other hand, does take note of what the king enjoys or dislikes and the next day serves the food the king enjoys. The fool gets fired and the wise cook gets rewarded. In such a way, the Buddha compares the foolish meditator who ‘doesn’t pick up the sign of the mind’ with the wise one who does.

So really listen to how your embodied system responds to your practice. Check the extremities of the breathing for any resistances. Is any attitude stopping your out-breath from continuing? Is there any pressure to breathe in rather than let it happen? Anything abbreviating the inhalation – in your chest, throat or forehead? You may find it helpful to extend your awareness to lightly cover your face as the inhalation comes to completion, and to cover the base of your body and even your legs as the exhalation subsides. But don’t push the breath. Support the release of the breath-tide by relaxing inhibitions and resistances. Then linger, and savour the psychological and emotional effects.

As the breathing begins to manifest in a steady and comfortable way, it will more fully extend through the body – ‘breathing long’. Then with thinking being reined in and receptivity directed to the breathing, less energy is being expended – and so the breathing settles. Consequently, less breath is needed and the physical action of breathing becomes quite brief and the breath becomes more subtle – ‘breathing short’. But as this isn’t associated with the breath being constricted, it’s not a dull state. In fact, the energy grows brighter and steady.

If this isn’t the case, it’s likely that your awareness is being dulled. In which case, breathe out steadily, and at the point when you’re about to breathe in – don’t. Pause for ten or more seconds, then allow the breath in slowly. Relax for a breath or two, then repeat the exercise a few more times.

When the energy is smoothly flowing, you can be mindful of the inhalation, exhalation and the pause that connects these flows. Then you have a breath-current that you can work with. And as your attention unifies the current of breathing and the upright axis within its focus, these energies merge and strengthen. Then you experience the breathing body as a subtle, living and flexing form, a ‘body among the bodies’ as the Ānāpānasati Sutta puts it (M.118:24). Linger in it, and appreciate it. This is supposed to be enjoyable – how about that?