What is the purpose of almsround? (51)

Buddhists consider that the work of monastics (the study, practice and teaching of Dhamma) is so important that they should be free to pursue it without concern for the basic material necessities of life. Householders believe much merit is acquired by offering material support to the Sangha.

The Buddha designed the monastic discipline in such a way as to prevent monks from completely cutting themselves off from the world. The training rules dealing with food play a major part in fulfilling this aim. One rule, for example, stipulates that monks may only eat food that has been formally offered to them by lay Buddhists on the morning that it is to be eaten. This ensures daily contact between the monastics and the laity, and means that even the more remote forest monasteries are established within walking distance of a village. Almsround is a daily expression of the symbiotic relationship between the Sangha and the lay Buddhist community. Walking through the local village, the monks receive their daily sustenance, and the laity, in the act of giving to them, are reminded of moral and spiritual values.

Almsround is of spiritual benefit to both the monastics and the laity. For sincere monks, it is a humbling and often moving reminder of the generosity that allows them to lead their monastic life. It inspires them to express their appreciation of the faith placed in them by being diligent in performance of their duties. Almsround gives lay Buddhists the opportunity to begin their day with an act of generosity. They feel the joy of giving and the contentment of having contributed to the well-being of the monks they look up to. It is also an opportunity for them to dedicate the merit that arises from their goodness to departed loved ones. Many parents teach their children to put food in the monks’ bowls from an early age, introducing the children to monastics in an activity that they find special, and which creates a sense of familiarity and connection.

I dedicate my body and mind, my whole life, to the practice of the Lord Buddha’s teachings in their entirety. I will realize the truth in this lifetime... I will let go of everything and follow the teachings. No matter how much suffering and difficulty I have to endure I will persevere, otherwise there will be no end to my doubts. I must make this life as even and continuous as a single day and night. I will abandon attachments to mind and body and follow the Buddha’s teachings until I know their truth for myself.

Ajahn Chah