How are the hindrances to meditation overcome? (110)

The first strategy meditators employ in dealing with hindrances is straightforward. They simply recognize a hindrance as a hindrance, release their interest in it, and mindfully return to the meditation object without indulging in thoughts of discouragement, frustration or disappointment. By patiently returning to the meditation object again and again and again, meditators develop the ability to sustain awareness in the present moment. As a result, hindrances arise less often, they are recognized more quickly and abandoned more easily.

In the case where a particular hindrance has reached a chronic level and does not respond to the simple technique of withdrawal of interest and return to the object, specific antidotes are applied. Reflection on the unattractive aspects of the physical body opposes and undermines intoxication with its attractive aspects. Generating thoughts of loving-kindness and compassion opposes and undermines entrenched thoughts of ill-will. Wise reflection on death can lead the mind out of the slough of laziness and complacency.

Hindrances are overcome temporarily by the cultivation of an unbroken stream of mindfulness. When the hindrances are no longer present, the mind enters a stable calm state characterized by an effortless awareness, a strong sense of well-being and a readiness for the work of vipassanā . Through the development of vipassanā the meditators may eventually reach a point at which hindrances no longer arise in their minds.

Not withstanding the various techniques available for dealing with hindrances in formal meditation sessions, the transformative effects of meditation only become apparent when meditators put effort into applying Dhamma principles in their daily life. People who lead heedless or overly busy lives find that their way of life feeds the hindrances to such an extent that meditation techniques are powerless to overcome them. The inner and outer elements of cultivation must be in harmony for progress to occur. For this reason, dedicated meditators take care of the quality of their actions and speech, and they simplify their lives as much as possible.