Did the Buddha have any views on economic affairs? (67)

By including “Right Livelihood” in the Eightfold Path, the Buddha recognized the role of economic activity both in promoting individual well-being, and in developing a society in harmony with the principles of Dhamma. He taught that Buddhists should take moral and spiritual criteria into account when considering a livelihood, in particular by abstaining from livelihoods harming other people, animals or the environment.

The Buddha emphasized the importance of making one’s living honestly and with a healthy motivation. He pointed out how honesty leads to self-respect and helps to create an atmosphere of mutual trust in the workplace (which, as present-day Buddhist economists have pointed out, leads to significant reductions in transaction costs). When desire is focused on the rewards of work rather than on the pleasure of a job well done, short-term thinking and corruption are always likely to appear. When peoples’ minds are focused on the quality of their work itself rather than the material rewards it provides, they become more content, experience less stress, and do better work.

One kind of economic behavior that the Buddha often criticized was the hoarding of wealth. He said that while expenditure should not exceed income, wise people use their wealth for the welfare of themselves and their families; they are generous to relatives and friends, and offer support to the Sangha and to the needy. The Buddha referred to food, clothing, shelter, and medicine as the four requisites indispensable for a sustainable life. Lacking access to any of these requisites—or being in constant anxiety about losing access to them—is a major cause of human suffering and renders spiritual cultivation almost impossible. In cases where local conditions make it impossible for people to obtain the four requisites, the Buddha taught that the ruler or government should offer assistance. In Buddhist terms, the measure of an economy is not to be found in the number of millionaires it can produce, but in the degree to which it can ensure access to the four requisites for all.