What are the chief obstructions to meditation? (107)

Meditators come face to face with a number of deeply ingrained mental habits that prevent their minds from experiencing inner peace and from cultivating insight. The Buddha pointed to five in particular. Whatever meditation technique meditators employ, their immediate task is to go beyond the reach of these five “hindrances” (nivāraṇa).

I) The first hindrance to meditation is delight in the pleasures derived from visible forms, sounds, odors, tastes and physical sensations. In sitting meditation, memories and imagination based upon topics meditators find enjoyable entice their minds away from the work at hand. The most powerful expression of this hindrance is sexual fantasy, but it may also appear as trains of thought linked to food, entertainments, sport, political issues—anything, in fact, that the meditator enjoys thinking about.

II) The second hindrance is ill-will. In meditation, ill-will may vary from intense feelings of hatred and prejudice at one end of the spectrum, to a subtle turning away from experiences felt to be unpleasant at the other. Ill-will may be focused on oneself, on others or on the surroundings.

III) The third hindrance is sloth and torpor. This hindrance includes laziness, boredom and mental dullness. In its coarsest manifestation, the meditator falls asleep or enters a dark state devoid of awareness. In its more subtle forms, the hindrance is felt as a slight stiffness or unwieldiness of mind.

IV) The fourth hindrance has two aspects. The first is mental agitation—the “monkey mind”—in which the mind jumps restlessly from one thought to another just as a monkey jumps from branch to branch with no particular goal. The second is indulgence in worry, anxiety and guilt.

V) The fifth hindrance is that of mental wavering and indecision, a form of doubt. As a recognition of a lack of information necessary to make a good decision, doubt is rational. Doubt becomes a hindrance when meditators possess all the information needed to proceed but are unable to commit themselves to any one path of practice. This hindrance asks questions like “But what if this is wrong?”, “What if it’s a waste of time?”, and expects the answers before putting in the effort that would supply them.

If you neglect to cultivate your inherent mindfulness and wisdom, striving half-heartedly, indifferent to the truth about yourself, the obstacles in your path will grow and multiply until they block all sight of the way, leaving the end of the road forever in darkness.

Mae Chee Kaew