Please explain the Eightfold Path in more detail (12)

The Eightfold Path is the holistic education or training of body, speech and mind that culminates in awakening.

Right View refers to beliefs, views, ideals, values that are in harmony with the way things are. Initially its most important elements are confidence in i) the human capacity for enlightenment, and ii) the law of kamma2.

Right Thought refers to thoughts consistent with Right View. These are characterized by a freedom from all kinds of toxic thinking, in particular that which is i) sensual, ii) hostile or iii) cruel. Right Thought includes the aspiration to be free from all inner affliction, and thoughts of kindness and compassion.

Right Speech is true, useful and timely speech that is polite and kindly in intent. It is speech free from i) lying, ii) harshness, iii) slander and iv) idle chatter.

Right Action refers to actions that do not harm self or others. At its most basic it refers to refraining from i) killing, ii) stealing and iii) sexual misconduct.

Right Livelihood refers to livelihood that does not cause harm to self or others. Wrong livelihoods listed in the texts include the selling of i) weapons, ii) living beings, iii) meat and fish, iv) intoxicants and v) poisons.

Right Effort refers to the endeavor to:

i) prevent unskillful thoughts and emotions that have not yet arisen in the mind from arising.

ii) reduce and eradicate unskillful thoughts and emotions that have already arisen in the mind.

iii) introduce into the mind skillful thoughts and emotions that have not yet arisen.

iv) sustain and further develop skillful thoughts and emotions already present in the mind.

Right Mindfulness refers to maintaining an alert, even-minded and committed awareness of present experience, in particular:

i) the physical body

ii) the affective tone of experience: pleasant, unpleasant or neutral

iii) the state of mind

iv) mental phenomena as they relate to the Buddha’s path of awakening

Right Concentration refers to the inner stability, clarity and peace experienced in four stages of “meditative absorption” or “jhāna”.

The first jhāna is characterized by five ‘jhāna factors’: an initial and sustained attention to the meditation object, zest, bliss and one-pointedness of mind. As the mind becomes more refined the coarser jhāna factors fade away. The second jhāna is reached with the shedding of initial and sustained attention. The disappearance of zest signals attainment of the third jhāna. With the loss of bliss the mind enters the fourth and most subtle level of jhāna, distinguished by unshakeable equanimity.