What is the present state of Thai Buddhism? (88)

It is difficult to gauge the health of Thai Buddhism. Abundant evidence of corruption and decline co-exists with growing signs of a renaissance.

Thai Buddhism certainly faces some difficult challenges. The monastic order is not in the best of health. It is generally accepted that its system of administration and provision of education need reform. Adherence to the Monastic Discipline is often lax. Very few monks observe the prohibition on accepting gifts of money. Until the money-based economy took firm grip in Thailand about fifty years ago, this was not a serious issue. But as society has grown richer, so donations have increased. Monks are faced with serious temptations and more than a few succumb. Rather than providing a critique of materialism and consumer values, some monasteries have embraced them. In the countryside there are many empty monasteries. With the drastic reduction in the birth rate and the pull of the city, there are fewer people joining the order. (A figure of some 300,000 monastics seems large but has remained stable for many years, while during the same period, the general population has doubled). Historically, the well-being of Buddhism has always been closely tied to the well-being of the Sangha. For this reason, there are serious causes for concern.

In the wider society, consumerist values spread their tentacles ever more widely. Huge numbers of the young and poor leave their homes in search of work in Bangkok or overseas. Working long hours in factories far from the support of family and monastery, they easily become alienated from Buddhist values. Life in the towns and cities is busy and stressful for almost everyone.

Fortunately, there are also many encouraging signs. Interest in meditation is at an all-time high. Monasteries and meditation centers that offer retreats to lay Buddhists are flourishing. Huge numbers of Buddhist books and DVDs are sold and distributed freely every year. Over the past few years, Buddhist radio stations have been set up in almost every district, often run by monasteries, and are very popular. A great many people lacking the time to go to monasteries are involved in online forums, discussing the Dhamma, sharing teachings that have inspired them. Particularly heartening is the number of young people turning to Buddhist teachings and practice for inspiration in their lives.