What are the main Buddhist holidays? (90)

In Thailand three Buddhist holidays are celebrated: Māgha Pūjā, Visākha Pūjā and Asālha Pūjā. The dates of these holidays change from year to year, being determined by the lunar rather than the solar calendar. The holidays commemorate important events that took place on full-moon days in the time of the Buddha. Each holiday is dedicated to one of the three refuges: Māgha Pūjā to the Dhamma, Visākha Pūjā to the Buddha and Asālha Pūjā to the Sangha.

Māgha Pūjā is celebrated on the full moon of February. It commemorates the day on which the Buddha delivered the seminal Ovāda Pātimokkha discourse, in which he summarized the teaching of all the Buddhas. The occasion is considered especially auspicious as his audience consisted of 1,250 fully enlightened monks, all of whom had gathered at the monastery in which the Buddha was residing with no prior arrangement.

Visākha Pūjā is celebrated on the full moon of May. It is believed that it was on this day that the Buddha was born, became enlightened and passed away. It is a day dedicated to the recollection of the Buddha and is considered the most important date in the Buddhist calendar.

Asālha Pūjā is celebrated on the full moon of July. It commemorates the day when the Buddha taught his first discourse, the Dhammacakkhapavattana Sutta, which “set in motion the wheel of Dhamma”. His audience consisted of the group of five former followers who had accompanied him through years of ascetic practices. At the end of the discourse one of these ascetics, Aññā Kondañña, realized the first stage of enlightenment and thus became the first member of the “community of noble ones” or Sangha.

On Buddhist holidays, lay Buddhists take part in many meritorious activities: offering food to the monastic order, taking renunciant precepts, listening to sermons, meditating. But the most popular activity is participating in the candlelit circumambulations around Buddha statues or reliquary stupas that most monasteries arrange at night time, once the full moon has risen.