## Preface

Buddha-Nature, Human Nature is a book about our environment and the effects that Buddhism has had and can have upon it. The idea of writing such a book was initiated by attending a Vipassana Teachers’ Conference in 2013 at Spirit Rock Meditation Center in California. Included in that conference was a stirring presentation about climate change and its current and predicted effects; we teachers were then left with the question: given that you are in a position to address others, is there anything you can do to bring awareness of this impending catastrophe to your students? Is there any way that you could contribute towards giving people of the future the benefit of a healthy environment? A number of us made commitments to teach in terms that would encourage extending ethical responsibility to include the Earth. I also decided that writing a book on the topic would offer greater outreach. I had previously touched into environmental topics in 1989 with the booklet Buddha-Nature – which I had produced for the Interfaith Gathering on Religion and the Environment at Canterbury, England. So at first what seemed to be needed was an update of that material. In fact, it has entailed much more, as even the limited research that I have undertaken revealed a world-view that both supports escalating environmental destruction and seems impervious to the global protests and scientific evidence mounted against it.

I have attempted to use a ‘scientific’ method: to refer to data from a range of sources over a period of time, look at the results and deduce a conclusion. Of course all statistics are open to interpretation and the specific details change with time; but when a mass of them from different sources, each adopting a scientific method, arrives at the same conclusion, it would be hard not to take them seriously. And when such statistics are challenged by those with invested interests, it suggests a bias. It has, for example, been discovered that the oil industry buried reports of the effects of fossil-fuel emissions, and hired people to provide false data to contradict what prizewinning scientists were claiming. So whose reports do you trust?

However, I have broadened my review beyond that of ecologists or social activists – books and articles expressing their views and evidence already abound. And I’m not an ecologist, an economist or a biologist. Instead, I’m looking into the total environment within which an average person finds himself or herself today; admittedly from a Western perspective and a Buddhist one. For this, I present a fourfold map of our environment, comprising our individual and collective material domain (our own body and the Earth on which it depends) and our individual and collective immaterial domain (our minds and the views, ideologies and religions that steer our collective mind-sets). In reviewing this, my assessment is that environmental abuse is systemic and built into the ways in which we conceive of ourselves, and organized into separate collectives: classes, tribes, nations and so on.

These four represent the totality of our environment, and my conclusion is that we can’t address the biosphere without addressing this totality, which I call ‘the cosmos’. In brief, my argument is that the aspects of the cosmos that we have generated to organize our lives – the economy, the political bodies, the religions and cultural beliefs – have adopted a ‘domination’ paradigm. Initially this allowed us to dominate the Earth, and each other, but increasingly these systems dominate all of us to our detriment. And no single person or group is in control of them.

How to respond to this state of affairs, which at times seems massively immoveable, is a matter for inquiry. My sense is that this status quo is in itself innately unstable – that nature, both planetary and human, cannot support a domination paradigm indefinitely, because the bottom line is that it depends on living systems whose resources are finite. The soil becomes barren or is washed away, the water and air become toxic, and climate change wreaks havoc. Also, at a certain level of stress, people just can’t continue with the kind of energies and attitudes that it takes to push harder, to produce more and at the same time contribute to the degradation of their living space. Although this breakdown has a sense of inevitability to it, action is necessary to resist its effects and build up healthier alternatives. This is basic Buddhist practice: resist greed, hatred and delusion, develop restraint, goodwill and wisdom. As action is an important aspect of our humanity, to steadily desist from participating in activities that abuse life is already a powerful undertaking. I think it is our duty. Wherever possible, alternatives should be sought and developed to turn the tide.

Revolutions, quiet as well as violent, are part of our history, and I would hope that through participating in an outspoken one, albeit conducted with compassion, patience and resolve, we can restore what remains of our environment. The search for new ways of existing in the world is also a part of our ongoing history; with enough understanding of our blind spots and with the right kind of guidance, we may yet forge a more agreeable future. I feel that the Buddha’s teaching (Dhamma) can offer at least some of this guidance, since the Buddha addressed human nature – the magic and the muck of it – in deep and timeless ways.

The recognition of suffering and stress is the entry point to Dhamma, along with the reminder that it doesn’t have to be this way. Our human nature is capable of liberation from the root poisons of greed, hatred and delusion, and the result is greater happiness for all. However, the totality of environmental suffering is a lot to take in, so I hope that in the ensuing pages I do not overwhelm you with statistics, or neglect to mention the more positive aspects of our situation. Admittedly the picture it presents is not cheerful, but positive solutions are suggested. I also admit that a full exploration of the environmental dilemma – with solutions – is beyond any one book and certainly beyond me. But I continue to have faith in human nature and reckon that as there are over seven billion of us, we could work it out. As a bhikkhu, I am constantly offered support to live this life; my response to that has to be to tell the truth of suffering, its causes, its ceasing and the Path to its ceasing. This book is just another aspect of that duty.

The book is structured around five main parts, with three chapters in each part. There is also a final part in which, to the extent that an ongoing story can have one, there are some concluding remarks.

The parts also contain ‘panels’ – short, self-contained pieces that present a vignette, a detail that bears on the topic of the part within which they stand. The parts are illuminated with quotes – from the Buddha and a range of other people. After each part there is a guided meditation to help the reader get back to the here and now after the conceptual journey.

Part I. Manager’s Report: We’re Costing the Earth proposes that ‘the environment’ includes our bodies and minds, and looks into the economic system that underpins the abuse of this total environment.

Part II. Refuge and Roots reviews the Buddha’s life, teachings and community to familiarize the reader with the Buddhist models for a sane and liberating environment.

Part III. Nature, Dhamma and the State is a historical review of how human collectives have responded to the environment, comparing the Aśokan Buddhist empire and indigenous culture with subsequent developments.

Part IV. The Sacredness of Nature explores how nature is held within various cultures, principally Buddhist, Judeo-Christian, animist, and what I term ‘mechanist’.

Part V. House of Many Windows: Plurality and Integration continues to review the preceding themes, but with more emphasis on the study of mind, through the twentieth century.

Part VI. A World Beyond? is an epilogue.

There is also a chronological structure: Parts I and IV are based in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries; Part II goes back to the time of the Buddha; Part III centres around a Buddhist timeline in Asia from the Aśokan era to the present; and Part IV follows a similar line from the time of the Buddha to the beginning of the twentieth century, but includes the West. I have telescoped the time frames to give predominance to the modern era, as this is where we may more directly witness and respond to what the text proposes.

As far as the citations go: those that have no name appended are from the Buddhist Pali Canon. The abbreviations are unwrapped on a following page. The others, as many as I can track down, are listed in the Endnotes.

I offer my gratitude to the number of people who have offered information and feedback in terms of fashioning this book. Also to the monasteries and refuges that have given me the time and space to do the work. In particular, I would like to mention the editorial support of the Lotus Support Group, Anthony Morgan and Lisa Gorecki – and also the typesetting and design skills of Nicholas Halliday. Any errors in the presentation are of course my responsibility.

Ajahn Sucitto, 2019