COMPASS POINTS

PERCEPTION, FEELING AND RESPONSE

Feelings change, don’t they. From agreeable to disagreeable, through neutral – and back again. It’s all very moving stuff, but as long as the heart’s motivation is bound up with getting and holding onto pleasure and not being able to manage its decline, life is going to be tense. And that feels unpleasant. But there’s a way of handling things differently. It’s to do with how we respond to agreeable or disagreeable tones of feeling (vedanā) – and practising this brings around an end to stress, restlessness and feeling trapped by life. Moreover, we can get the support to end that stress in our own bodies. It just requires investigation and radical honesty.

Consider for yourself some obvious examples of how, with the same sense-object, the feeling and response can change. What looked beautiful five years ago (a judgment that other people might disagree with) probably seems average now. The first bite of an apple may be sweet, the tenth is so-so; eat another apple and it’s boring. The change is not in sense input, but in the rapidly formulated perceptions (saññā) that the mind creates. ‘Amazing’ becomes ‘old-fashioned’; ‘lively’ becomes ‘noisy’; ‘exciting’ becomes ‘same old thing.’ We can even establish thrilling perceptions based on sheer fantasies – such as with entertainment – yet even these don’t last. Realizing that can bring around a pessimistic perception of life as a futile search for happiness. That also feels bad… and triggers further responses and perceptions.

Other than through physical impact, feeling arises as the mind scans the other senses and delivers perceptions (that is, impressions and meanings). These saññā arouse mental feeling and evoke responses (saṅkhārā) in the feeling-response system of heart/citta. The citta’s responses affect the body, even when they’re responding to a fantasy (as when your heart beats or you feel tense on account of what’s presented on a screen). Yet, although perceptions are inconstant and unreliable, they normally generate a response that establishes another perception: we describe something as noisy or musical, original or boring. That perceptually-derived experience then acts as the basis for the next set of responses – whether that be to do something, or to change the input. The net result of all this is the sense of being someone impacted, aroused and even driven by the linked-up process of feeling, perception and response. Yet … what if that feeling-perception process could be witnessed, moderated and allowed without acting on it, holding onto it or repressing it? What kind of a ‘me’ would be the result? An unstressed one, probably. So this is a move in the right direction.

When you explore that process, you’ll notice that with any degree of contact there’s an immediate shift of energy. To feel anything means that the nervous system has to be stimulated – which means that its energy moves. That movement is the initial, involuntary response, and it is embodied. It can even occur before perception informs you. For example, your skin tells the hand to drop the hot plate before you realize that it’s painful. A loud crash causes your body to jump before you know what caused the sound. But the response then leaves a perceptually-based feeling: you might experience relief that you’re not badly burnt, or that the loud crash was nothing significant.

We can learn to play with this system: to go for a ride in a roller-coaster, or jump into cold water – and move from fear or shock to exhilaration to a sense of being refreshed … and happy. Embodied energy races through a series of mental impressions – and as we arrive at a steady state the perception is ‘I’ve been through a challenge and I’m OK.’ To take another example, a tough game of football may leave the players bruised and exhausted … and dejected if they lost, but exuberant if they won. You might get a similar result after concluding a paper on management. Meanwhile, if you’re absorbed in a movie you might not notice that your body is cramped and uncomfortable. So the prevailing state is based upon where the citta settles – and that process is independent of physical sensations. Therefore, whether the body’s reflex bypasses the mind, or the mental feeling overrides the physical feeling, what counts is what touches and activates the citta.

Understanding this point encourages and allows for some fine-tuning on where we place our attention. We can focus on non-sensory phenomena, such as integrity, goodwill or composure – and that lifts attention from sensation-based feeling: we can disregard or get perspective on it. This is useful, because as long as the mind is attending to seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, thinking, and the perceptions based on these, the citta gets tangled up in reactions to phenomena over which it has no say. ‘Go to the heart, steady and gladden it,’ has to be a fundamental directive.

Mindfulness of body gives us a further way of managing feeling, perception and response. If one’s attention is grounded in the body, it calms the nervous energy through which responses occur. Then the citta settles. This allows its awareness to be open and alert. And that lessens the impact of perceptions, and puts them into perspective. For example, it’s good to have the perception: ‘a plate from the oven might burn me,’ but not to the point of paranoia around plates. On a subtler level, mentally-derived signals of friendship, reliability or hostility provide a constant felt backdrop to actions, thoughts and even to being seen. Shopping, voting, socializing… how to know whether the signals are valid? Since perceptions are about what could be, should be or what something (or someone) reminds me of, and are not about what something is in itself – how can we know what signals to trust?

The pragmatism of the Buddhist approach is: whatever the signal, put the perception to one side and review the energy and the state that arises with it. Is it helpful or not? For example, we can use images and chanting that arouse perceptions whose energies gladden or steady the citta; and in contrast, notice that images that encourage consumerism, hostility or fear produce energies that stir the citta but leave it blurred or contracted. Wisdom then arises through keeping the citta focused on the energy of the signal and where your response to it takes you. So we focus not so much on what something seems to be, but rather on relating to how it affects us.

Furthermore, with bodily reflexes, once the response has done its job, once you’ve dropped the hot plate or jumped away from an oncoming car, the body’s energy discharges and things return to balance. As this is the system that carries the citta’s response, if the heart’s response is traced in terms of how it affects the body, then it will also allow emotional responses to be felt, contemplated and released.

The mind can’t do that. It may dismiss or override, but it can’t let go. It can remember and recycle the horrors and disappointments of bygone years – and it does so if the body hasn’t fully felt, responded and discharged the energetic effect. Why is that? Because we dismiss the feeling and response (aka ‘emotion’) to ‘get over it’ and get on with life. Or maybe citta clamps shut to defend itself from feeling (as with trauma) or when a response might upset the social situation, or damage the person’s image. Then the effect of any of that gets locked in the feeling-response system. There can be a good amount of unprocessed perception and feeling locked up in there. And that state becomes the basis of our identity.

Thus, this particular body-mind-heart link around perception and response conditions how our inner life is formed. And it is through gently activating this link, not through the senses, that clarity can be established. Body can protect the citta by providing a place that is at a remove from feeling based on sense-perception. It can also offer its ability to discharge the energetic residues of the citta’s responses. For its part, the citta can generate positive moods and energies that resonate in the body to provide uplift, stability and openness. The settledness that comes from these non-sensory bases is something that the Buddha encouraged us to develop. Then when body, heart and mind walk together, we walk in fresh air: the steady receptivity becomes our basis.

Simply walking, we work through the weave of perception, feeling and compulsive responses. And with a release from this linkage, it becomes clear that there’s no-one bound up in them.