Preface

INITIAL STEPS

These days, meditation instruction generally occurs within communal halls where the emphasis is on avoiding contact with others (to maintain an internal focus) and concentrating on a single point. With this approach, attention is held tight and mental energy gets intensified. The drawback with this is that a meditator may seal off aspects of their natural receptivity, and prioritize drive and control over sensitivity. In such a scenario, meditators tend to adopt the goal-oriented ‘business model’ that is the predominant state of their worldly lives. It’s a stressful model, and it has to be abandoned – otherwise healthy natural energy is lost. Then meditation is no longer a natural cultivation; instead it becomes a work project.

The Buddha encouraged meditation to be practised when sitting, walking, standing or reclining. Out of these four, walking is unique because it supports mindfulness, full awareness and wisdom in the mode that most closely resembles that of our daily life: that of operating as an individual in the midst of an interactive world. Such a situation poses the question: ‘How do I find authenticity and balance in myself while being sensitive and responsive to whatever’s going on around me?’ Well, mindful walking, by establishing a supple and balanced bodily presence, trains and encourages us to move through the world by moderating the responses and feelings that occur in the heart as we experience it. More profoundly, this practice gives us tools to clear and brighten the psychological environment of our inner world. This is not by shutting it down, but by walking a firm and balanced presence through it, while discarding what isn’t needed and giving full attention to what is useful and uplifting. Walking can then model an engaged process that supports a deepening into peace and understanding.

In the Thai forest mode of practice, masters spent at least as much time walking as sitting, often more. They found that the movement encouraged the mind to inquire, and the pacing gave prolonged vitality to their practice. Although the urban environment that most people live in today doesn’t offer such long undisturbed paths, in this book I suggest that walking can be done indoors inside an average room.

So, here is an attempt to guide the reader to this fluid but settled mode of meditation. I suggest that mindfulness of the fluidity of conditions is natural – even when sitting still, breathing is a flowing process. Moreover, through bearing in mind the rhythmic and settled energy of the body, there is an arrival at that unification of heart of which the Buddha spoke when he said: ‘the concentration attained through walking meditation is long-lasting’ (A.5:29). In other words, the process of clearing, firming and releasing the heart is not confined to sitting still, or focusing on one point in the body. It’s a matter of maintaining balance within movement. This small book attempts to indicate a way to develop that balance, literally a step at a time.

In here you’ll come across a series of guides to the practice, presented in a graduated sequence. These are accompanied by:

FOOTPRINTS: These are summaries, bullet points to return to.

COMPASS POINTS: These offer details on points that rise out of the guides in order to align them to the language and broader themes of Theravada Buddhism. Some readers may like to know the sutta references, so I’ve added those.

(A is for Numerical Discourses [Anguttara Nikāya], S is for Connected Discourses [Saṃyutta Nikāya].)

SIDETRACKS: The main guidelines are like a track to walk along. However, you’ll recognize that from time to time, your feet hurt, or you bought the wrong footwear, or it’s raining. Hence I’ve added ‘sidetracks’: short stories that illustrate how people practise mindful walking within the circumstances of their lives. The characters are fictitious, and I have formulated the stories. However these sidetracks are based on anecdotes and insights that I have heard of over more than forty years of teaching.

There is a QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS section at the end that replicates the periods of inquiry that are a part of most meditation retreats.

I wish to acknowledge the creative efforts of Nicholas Halliday who crafted the layout, design and illustrations. I appreciate the editorial scrutiny of the Lotus Volunteer Group. Anumodana! Also it is the aspirations, struggles and joys of many practitioners that have encouraged me to think that writing this guide would be useful.

Thank you! Sharing Dhamma is beautiful.

Ajahn Succito