Getting On Track

Keeping the kind of pace and poise that I’ve been describing, take a short walk – for maybe ten minutes – in your house, in your garden or on the street. Don’t look at anything in particular – except what you need to in order to navigate. Your eyes are open, receptive but not roaming around. Bring the sense-organ of your skin into awareness. You might imagine your body is lightly wrapped in a sensitive medium that covers it like an envelope … well, it is. That’s your skin. Through that, feel the space around you, the absence of pressure, the presence of openness. Open your awareness to sense that; take it into your heart.

Then notice what happens. Maybe some train of thought moves in and picks up speed, perhaps it’s a concern about the future, or about your family. Maybe you see or hear something that grabs your attention. Note these, but draw your awareness back to the whole-body focus and feel what happens within your body as these impressions arise. You may sense some stirring as energy picks up and shifts, probably into your face and head – though you might also get a tightening in your chest and abdomen. You might realize that thinking affects your bodily state. However, what’s most likely is that almost immediately attention goes to thinking about whatever has affected you. And then … the thoughts fill your awareness and multiply. How helpful is that?

However, building on the realization that body and mind are connected, you can keep the mind contained by strengthening your awareness of walking through the space that’s touching your skin. Imagine, for example, walking through mist or water and feeling it open around you as you move.

I’d also generally recommend that you walk along a regular track, approximately straight or perhaps in a circle, in order to simplify your focus. If you can find a track that will allow twenty or more paces without zigzags, that’s fine. Otherwise, it’s possible to use ten or less. You then walk to and fro, or alternate clockwise-anti-clockwise in a circle, with pauses at the end of each direction, or wherever and whenever you need to stop and adjust. This is because the regularity of a track can send the mind into automatic mode, whereby pacing takes on a driven obsessive mood. Remember, you’re only using a track to contain attention, not to constrict it. If you focus on the movement of your body in the here and now, and pause when you go off that topic, feel driven or go into automatic, you can get the benefit of a regular track – that is, you don’t have to negotiate your walking with the changing world around it.

However, as an alternative, you could walk mindfully along a regular route – in a park for example, or maybe on your way to work or school. Once again set your attention to cover the entire body as you stand. Give attention to balance. Most often, we’re top-heavy: we lead our walking with the head and shoulders, because we’re aiming to get somewhere. But your head can’t walk. And you won’t arrive any sooner by walking with your head tilted forward. This mode just draws your shoulders over – and that gets uncomfortable. When you’re led by your head, that involves focusing your eyes and unconsciously holding your head with your neck muscles. So they get stiff.

To counteract all this, relax your shoulders, and draw your head back until it settles on top of your spine. You may find it helpful to have your hands lightly clasped behind or in front of you, or just left free – whatever prevents your shoulders and chest from pulling the spine over. Balance is centred on your spine, so moor your attention on that column as it extends from beneath your head down to the tailbone. Imagine that the line of attention you’ve just drawn can extend down to your feet, and let your awareness gently expand from that central axis to spread evenly through the entire form to reach the boundary of the skin. Where awareness goes, energy follows, so this spreads energy through the body and checks the tendency for awareness and energy to condense either in your head or in the front of your body. Then there’s a unified sense of whole-body presence, rather than the restricted awareness of being in your head looking at or thinking about what’s going on. Instead awareness opens the heart, and you feel centred and quietly happy.

Remember to relax your eyes, forehead and jaw. It’s as if your eyes can float in their sockets – when you have a regular track, you don’t need a sharp visual focus. Then as you walk with a relaxed belly and a flexible waist, walk as if the spine is carrying a stack of plates with the head on top. Don’t get rigid – the truth is that the spine naturally operates like that. It’s a curvy stack of vertebrae that supports the head and the upright carriage. Its base is in the lumbar pelvis, which is the leader of walking. So if your attention is centred around the lumbar-sacrum region, your awareness can pick up the rhythmic turning of the lower vertebrae while being stabilized by the spinal axis as a whole. From the waist and lumbar region, you can also sense the slow swelling and subsiding of the breathing in the abdomen. The repeated light sensations of your feet touching the ground punctuate the movement as a whole.

If your face is kept relaxed, the slight counterbalancing swing in the shoulders has a massaging effect on the neck muscles. Take some time to settle into that. Get comfortable, and let the movement release tension in your shoulders, neck and head. Then expand your awareness to the boundaries of your body – equally to the back and the front – and feel the skin, with its tingling and flushes, and the space immediately around you.

Many sensations and felt senses occur dependent on what’s outside the body. This is what is meant by the expression ‘mindful of the body externally’, as the Buddha put it. Normally our attention goes to the presence of sensations, or more particularly the pleasant or unpleasant feeling that arises with them. But here we’re widening attention to include the spine – which isn’t affected by external contact – the skin, which generally isn’t being impacted by much more than the weather, and above all, the steady energy of walking. The reduction of impact that arises through restraining seeing, hearing and thinking is a relief. Combined with the calm and rhythmic turning of the spine and the openness of the skin, the overall experience is one of pleasant and balanced composure.

This encourages the mind to not get engrossed in sensations that come and go, but to attend to these cool and steady aspects of embodiment. By taking these in, your heart receives that agreeable feeling and calms the mind. Mental chatter dies down and you feel open – even though you’re quite contained.

As you get more experienced, you learn to contain your awareness within the boundaries of the body and extend it out to the degree that’s needed, rather than go out totally exposed to random sense-impact. Because, although what you see, hear, taste, or smell can’t actually get under your skin, anything that is attended to becomes a topic to feel and think about – and feeling and thinking do penetrate the mind and heart. Then that quiet centre is lost. So it’s good to train your attention to be discriminative, like a discerning listener; then directly sense where your skin and your spine are. This mindful attention to your body’s axis and boundaries will reduce the impact of senses that are focused externally and help to contain the thinking mind.

If this sounds like you have to keep shifting your attention here and there, reflect on how you would carry a bowl of water on your head and walk. You would be aware of the overall carriage of your body, particularly of keeping your head in line with your spine. You’d have to relax in your chest and belly to make sure that the walking was smooth and balanced. You’d need to see what was around you, but you wouldn’t be gazing at anything in particular or paying attention to details. You had also better not worry about dropping the bowl or what to do next. Your attention would best be spread over the entire upright axis, with your awareness opening around that to supervise the balance – while noticing any relevant phenomena. That’s walking meditation.

So don’t get stiff. Feel the space open in front of your chest as you walk. This might be helped by the suggestion that you’re walking through still water at chest-height, or through mist that parts around you. Your spine is like the mast of a boat, your chest like a sail opening to the space immediately touching your skin. Cruise on!

FOOTPRINTS

1 USE A PATH, TRACK OR TRAIL THAT REQUIRES MINIMUM ATTENTION. THIS ALLOWS YOU TO RELAX YOUR EYES, AND, AS EYE-MOVEMENT STIMULATES THINKING, THAT LESSENS DISCURSIVE THOUGHT.

2 ESTABLISH THE ‘UPRIGHT AXIS’ OF THE SPINE, ROOTED IN THE PELVIS AND CROWNED BY THE HEAD. THIS WILL GIVE YOU THE UNCOMPRESSED UPRIGHT CARRIAGE. SENSE YOUR BODY TURNING AROUND THAT AXIS. THE TURNING WILL HELP TO RELAX YOUR NECK AND WAIST.

3 CENTRED ON THAT AXIS, EXPAND YOUR AWARENESS TO YOUR SKIN. REMEMBER, AS THE VISUAL SENSE POINTS FORWARDS, YOU MAY NEED TO PUT AN EMPHASIS ON FEELING YOUR BACK. WHEN YOU HAVE THAT OVERALL AWARENESS, OPEN TO THE SPACE YOU’RE MOVING THROUGH.