Inner Walking

ELEMENTS

I’ve mentioned mindfulness of the body ‘externally’, so you might be wondering, ‘is there an internal aspect to this practice?’ Yes, there is ‘mindfulness of body internally’ – a phrase that we could interpret in a few ways. We could think about liver and blood and bones, but that’s thinking, not direct felt experience. You can’t directly know you have a spleen. But you can directly feel the degrees of firmness, fluidity, warmth, and movement happening within your body. These are called the ‘four great elements’ (earth, water, fire and air). There’s also a fifth element, that of space, both within and around your body. Don’t skip over the fact that it’s the space around you that allows you to move! Awareness of that really helps to lighten up the intensity of mental content.

You can contemplate the experience of body in these terms, internally as well as externally, and in the world around you. Sunlight and bodily warmth are fire; the firmness of land and skeletal structure are earth; the wind blowing leaves and the movement of breath are both air; and water is rain, streams and the overall fluidity and cohesiveness of the body. Space contains them all, and they’re all subject to change.

This analysis gives rise to a certain detachment regarding the body – it’s part of the physical universe, not a personal possession. These elements are changeable – sometimes we’re warm, sometimes cold; the firm feel of the body depends on where the bones are or where pressure is received – and these felt impressions don’t comprise a fixed entity at all. Firm flesh softens, supple skin grows dry and wrinkles, vitality flares and dwindles – and as the body breaks down, the elements return to Nature.

In your walking, you can reference the body as elements externally – most readily in the ‘earthing’ firmness of the foot touching the ground, and the space in front of your chest. Then internally – there’s the upright firmness of the spine, and the sense of space opening within the chest as you breathe. Breathing is obviously ‘air’, but there’s also ‘air’ in the feel of a moving leg. Then you could contemplate the vitality (‘fire’) of your body or the fluidity of its felt shape (‘water’).

This analysis brings direct awareness to the fore. Your awareness doesn’t know spleen, bones or breath; it doesn’t know what you look like, nor is it affected by such appearances. It is receptive and what it receives are impressions of an elemental nature. Sensing your body this way changes your perception from the basis of visual appearance, along with its critiques, to the steady ground of embodied reality. With that attention shift, a weight of self-consciousness is lifted from the heart.

This shift also supports a change of intention. The elements aren’t going anywhere, there’s no ‘forward’ or distance to cover. You can even walk on the spot (which is handy if you don’t have access to a track). You can feel the body lightly swinging as the spine turns, the brief ‘earth’ sensation of a foot taking the weight of the body and the gentle warming vitality that indicates ‘this is body.’ Walking is just the presence of these changing qualities. This perception then turns your intention towards an inner purpose – such as soothing agitation or firming up a resolve. All this helps to release stress and open the door to inquiry into the nature of mental and physical qualities.

THE SUBTLE BODY

You can go deeper into the internal body by exploring what activates these elemental qualities: the energies of the nervous system. By means of these, the body senses itself and organizes movement – as well as autonomous functions like heartbeat, vitality, and rate of breathing. Through this intelligence, the hands and eyes work together when we’re writing, driving and so on; the lips and the hand work together to get food into our mouths; fingers finely adjust their contact-pressure when holding a range of animate and inanimate objects – and breathing in and out rolls on even when we’re asleep. These are just a few examples of how our sensory-motor system and autonomous bodily functions are governed by the nervous system. It’s selective (attention: ‘notice this’), directive (intention and impulse: ‘do this’), and receptive (awareness: ‘open to this’). These three can be trained for your welfare.

In Buddhism, the energy of this embodied intelligence is called kāyasaṅkhāra, ‘bodily activation’ or ‘bodily formation’ (there are a number of translations). This is the vitality within the body that breathes, soothes and activates it. In spiritual traditions, the network that this energy flows through is sometimes called the ‘subtle body’. When its intelligence is organizing the walking in a smooth and comfortable way, and your awareness tunes in to that state of fluid poise, this subtle body feels bright and steady. You experience embodied presence. Then it’s relatively easy to anchor your attention in your body so that sense-contact (and thinking) stays at the edge of your awareness rather than occupying its centre. That gives you the space from which you can determine what’s worthwhile, gladdening (or not) ‘out there’ and extend your attention while remaining composed and balanced. Learning to stay balanced in this way, in the midst of action, is why walking meditation is a great training for daily life.

The most penetrative input that we have to work with is not sense-contact, but thinking, feeling and emotion. Because these affect the heart, they stimulate this subtle body – notice how its energy shifts when you’re angry, relaxed or enthusiastic – but through managing this vital energy, we can moderate thinking and steady our emotions.

Thinking isn’t a problem, it’s a necessary part of life. We just have to know how to manage it. Thinking about a project or a plan has an external aspect – we’re trying to work something out in the world ‘out there.’ But it also has an internal, heart, effect: it can feel fiery, foggy or firm, speedy or sluggish, painful or pleasing. We can fall in love with ideas and get frustrated when we can’t bring them to fruition. And even when it’s dithering and going nowhere useful, thinking grabs centre-stage. It ruminates and obsesses, mutters and rants, so even when there’s nothing external stirring your mind, its repetitive antics clog your awareness and tangle your vitality. All this takes energy.

Therefore it’s necessary at times to withdraw from thinking. Not by becoming stupid, but by contemplating its energy (rather than its topic) and turning your attention towards it – as in ‘this is thinking, what does it feel like?’ Steadily inquire: ‘How is the mental energy (“fiery”, “blustering”, “like damp fog”)?’ This non-judgmental and impersonal adjustment of thinking coolly derails its runaway trains. Then you can sense the emotional energy, the pressure or spin that underpins them. How does that feel? And where?

Like any other reflex, an emotional state seeks resolution, and in the attempt to find that, emotions often express themselves through thinking (and speaking). However, when emotions

compulsively surge and get repeatedly stuck; and when you’ve spent a long time trying to work out why you feel the way you do, whose fault it is, and what to do about it – you recognize that thinking doesn’t allay the emotion. More often than not, it just stirs things up, and gives rise to a sense of being stuck with it – and that initiates more thinking.

Rationality can’t undo a reflex or an emotion. But, as emotional energy (cittasaṅkhāra) shares the same response network as the inner body, if you’re looking for resolution and release, bring mindfulness to bear on the subtle body. This is a matter of withdrawing attention from the topic while maintaining a sympathetic awareness of how it’s affecting you in embodied terms. You can sense this in elemental ways. Sometimes it’s just the ‘closed in, no space’ state of gloom … at other times it’s the flush of happiness, the heat of rage, or the gut-churning pressure of worry and fear. In happy times you may feel a warming in your skin, whereas your throat tends to constrict with an emotional flood. Sensing things in terms of energy-formations helps to curtail unnecessary thinking and elaboration – the process that keeps it all so stuck.

Adjust your intention to one of open-hearted listening. However disagreeable and seemingly stupid the mood, your intention shouldn’t be to fix it, explain it, or cut it off. You can’t cut off your emotional activation without doing some damage – because it’s not a sensation, it’s a response. You don’t want to shut down a responsive heart. So the aim instead is to reset the system to a balanced state. This takes a full response: internal-external, and body, heart and mind working together.

In brief you walk the whole thing – body, heart and mind – along a path, steadily. In this way, attention to the energetic basis, sympathetic intention and open awareness will work on any troubled stuff, and delight in the bright, the clear and the balanced.

Settle in with the external aspects: suitable path, steady pace, whole-body walking. As you find a good norm, tune in to the body-heart relationship in its positive aspect. Allow yourself time to feel present, grounded and comfortable. Bring awareness into the heart by being a warm and generous listener. If inner turbulence takes over, turn attention to the external aspects of body to get settled. Then attend to the feel of walking as it flows between grounded stance and a light lift and swing, and especially as external and internal cooperate around keeping balance to the fore.

Dwell on and enjoy your balanced presence. This comes from the subtle body. It feels bright, light and open. You can feel the tactile sensations, but the experience of presence stands apart from them. It’s not in the same place as the sensations; it’s a whole-body experience, it’s internal, and it becomes evident when sensations don’t take over attention. Tune into that.

When there’s no marching, faltering, or resisting, this balanced energy naturally discharges excessive bodily activation. With that, there’s refreshment, and one feels tireless. The pressure releases: no need to find answers, or to not feel what you’re feeling. When inner narratives arise, keep walking and sustaining mindfulness of the comfortable container of attention, intention and awareness. Within that broad focus, moods and memories can be reviewed clearly – and moved through. The stress of getting activated by it all can be released, the past gets cleared – and right now, there’s more space in your life.

FOOTPRINTS

1 GET A SENSE OF THE ELEMENTS. HERE AWARENESS IS TO THE FORE, RATHER THAN ATTENTION. IT MAY HELP IF YOU NAME THEM AS YOU NOTICE THEM, THOUGH THIS NAMING SHOULD BE MINIMAL AND DISCARDED WHEN NOT NEEDED. YOU DON’T HAVE TO GET THEM ALL OR BE THAT PRECISE; IT’S A ‘FEELS LIKE THIS’ KIND OF APPROACH.

2 GIVE AWARENESS TIME TO ADJUST TO THIS NEW WAY OF EXPERIENCING THE BODY. AS YOU GET FAMILIAR WITH THESE ELEMENTAL TEXTURES, CAN YOU SENSE SIMILAR QUALITIES IN YOUR MIND OR HEART? WHEN DO THEY FEEL FIERY, FIRM OR SPACIOUS? WIDEN YOUR ATTENTION AND SOFTEN YOUR INTENTIONS. ALLOW THINGS TO ARISE IN THAT UNPRESSURIZED SPACE.

3 WHATEVER THE ELEMENT, THOUGHT OR MOOD THAT ARISES, BY BEING AWARE OF ITS ENERGY AS IT IS, THE HEART IS NOT SHAKEN AND THE MIND OPENS. IF SOME MOOD OR MEMORY FEELS STUCK, INQUIRE: ‘HOW IS THIS AFFECTING MY BODY?’ ‘WHAT’S THE UNDERLYING IMPRESSION THAT STIRS MY MIND/HEART?’ DEVELOP THIS APPROACH TO WHATEVER ARISES, KEEPING A SYMPATHETIC ATTITUDE IN MIND.