COMPASS POINTS

AWARENESS, ATTENTION AND MINDFULNESS

In using the words ‘aware’ and ‘awareness’ I am referring to the receptivity that comes with being conscious – that is, the ability to receive data. In Buddhism, this occurs within consciousness (viññāna) – as it receives data from all the senses, including that of mind (manas). Mind, or ‘mind-consciousness’ (manoviññāna), scans the other senses and registers their data in terms of meanings, impressions or recognized perceptions (saññā). As in the recognition: ‘that object is an apple’. This impression (it could of course be a plastic replica) catalyses a feeling (agreeable, disagreeable or neutral) and a response (interest, aversion). The awareness that receives an impression and its feeling, and duly responds is called ‘citta’, which I am translating as ‘heart’. (It’s also translated as ‘mind’.) Citta deals with feeling and a whole range of responses to perceptions conditioned by visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile and mental input. These responses (saṅkhārā) then shape our attitudes and steer our actions.

In terms of practice, the encouragement of the Buddha is to bring around the stopping of consciousness and the liberation of citta. This means that for a moment or more, the process of receiving input from the senses can be turned off. If citta is trained to refer to its receptivity, rather than to the data, then that awareness can stand alone with no items to respond to. Although this sounds eerie and nihilistic to the uninitiated, it is a supremely peaceful liberation. What brings this around is attention to the quality of response, and the inner silence that responses such as non-aversion, patience, and dispassion leave in awareness. The deepening sense of steadiness and non-entanglement eventually allows citta to reside peacefully, released from work. The released awareness is referred to as ‘ñāna’ (knowing) or ‘vijja’(clarity).

‘Attention’ (manasikāra) is the action of the mind in selecting a detail out of the entire visual (or auditory) field and focusing on it. Like looking through a telescope at the sky. It is motivated by ‘intention’ (cetanā) – the directive response of the heart.

‘Mindfulness’ (sati) is the ability to bear something in mind – whether that be an idea, a sensation, a mood, energy or teaching. It is a form of concentration, but when it is based on right view and wisdom it brings referential qualities to bear on any object of mindfulness. In this way, it filters out irrelevant, distracting or obscuring influences and supports the ‘full awareness’ (sampajañña) that gives insight into the transient nature of the content of consciousness. This results in dispassion and release.