On Through The Storms

For the onwards journey in an authentic life, the territory that we need to cross is that of our body and mind. We set out by experiencing the body in the here and now, in order to tether the wandering abstractions of the mind — and that allows a deepening into awareness and a steadying of the nervous energies that activate us. By bringing bodily and mental energies around the experience of a flowing balance, it is possible to touch into a place that is open, alive but not associated with sense-contact, thought or emotion. This place of presence is worth hiking a long way for. It is the place where the tides of pressure and aimless vacuity, of overwhelm and stagnation, don’t go. All your practice so far has been about accessing this sensitive stillness in the midst of circumstance. You can’t get there by maps, you have to follow your nose. Or rather, to tune in to the intelligence of awareness that takes this centre as its home base.

The strange consequence of this is, that as your awareness deepens and settles, you enter a challenging stretch of the hike, but the most rewarding. Let’s take this slowly.

What arises in terms of the process of deepening are storms that form out of the mental mist. They begin with preoccupations that stir you. There are pet peeves (there’s always something that’s not right), worries (there’s always something that is problematic), things you have to do (and yes, there’s always plenty of that), people you have issues with (oh yes, there are those too!). Then there are aspects of yourself that you’re not happy with – including how you keep getting stuck on these same trains to nowhere time and time again. …You may even conclude that of all the people in the world, you are the most hopeless, frustrating, and demanding one to live with. This is mesmerizing stuff … it all seems real enough – but ask yourself: ‘Why is all this breaking out now? After all, I’m just walking on a path, no-one’s bothering me, I’ve set aside half an hour for some peace and quiet. …’ Well, the fact is that you’re on track for clearing out afflictive potentials that reside in your mind and energy system. This is a path of purification, and now you’ve entered the territory of the hindrances; a potential that crops up in daily life but generally gets buried under circumstances, or slid over by distractions. However, here, now, there’s the possibility for transformation. Because if you can walk through this with whole body and heart, you’ll be a different person, more deeply at ease with yourself.

The method of clearing the hindrances is to step out of their narrative and examine their energy and mood. The first stirring may well be one of getting bored and dull: ‘Same old thing, not interested.’ As this takes shape, restlessness arises: ‘I can’t settle into walking up and down. There’s too much on my mind.’ There might be a tinge of irritation, then some doubt gusts in. Doubt about the practice: ‘What’s the point of doing this anyway?’ Doubt yourself: ‘I can’t do it.’ A search for a map and a highway: ‘What’s the method that will shut down these nagging thoughts and get me to emptiness?’ Then, right on cue, lightning bolts of ill-will flash down. ‘I’m fed up with this. I’m annoyed with the way so-and-so relates to me, but I feel so stupid getting caught up in all this.’ Then the fog of sense-desire closes in with its glowing auras: ‘Some fun music, a movie, a date with so-and-so – that would hit the spot.’ Suddenly even a walk in the park with an ice-cream feels like the peak of ecstasy that awaits you – as soon as you get off this walking meditation path.

OK, if that’s what you need ... but first why not take a few more paces? A few more minutes won’t hurt. .… Then, maybe, a sunbeam of realization breaks through: ‘I’ve already done all that, and it didn’t get me anywhere useful.’

Don’t close down. Just linger in that sunbeam of acknowledgement, opening your awareness towards your body, externally and internally. You may recognize some pressure zones. Maybe your energy is now packed in your head. Or gripping your chest. Or palpating your heart. Or causing your hands to tighten. Either that or your shoulders are hunching over. Somewhere in your body, the stress is speaking. Acknowledge those places and, spreading awareness over them, give attention to the sense of movement as you walk, and the touch of one footstep followed by another. As your awareness settles into the flow, let it softly and steadily widen to cover your entire body externally, down to your feet. Notice: ‘No ill-will in my feet.’ ‘No worry in my knees.’ Don’t forget to include the back of your head, neck and down your back. Then you can regain the spine, relax the belly and open into the fullness of walking. The vitality of walking will help to alleviate dull sleepy states, while the comfortable rhythm can soothe other inflamed hindrances.

As all this helps the inner body to open, you realize that all that pressure and storming has arisen from knots and tangles in your energy system. It all seems so personal – but when you investigate these energies and put aside the images and words, you realize that they are impersonal and elemental. Fiery or blurred or blustery or hard – everyone gets these. Then, just as you would smooth out a crumpled sheet or massage a tight muscle, you can clear your embodied mind by steadily sweeping your awareness from the tangles to include your entire body. In this way, you discharge the energy that the hindrances are knots of.

The list of five hindrances may at times seem too short, but if you examine the stresses and distortions in your energy system, you’ll trace the following essential qualities.

Sense-desire: There’s the desire to own, absorb or be gratified by sense-contact. This includes the attempt and concern to be physically desirable. Reflect on the stress of that. Then untangle the energy, and as it rests back in your inner body, you’ll feel contented and warm.

Ill-will: You experience irritation towards others or to yourself. There’s aversion towards the condition of one’s body or mind, and consequent resistance and forcefulness. Imagining that others look down on you, there is mistrust and fear of being rejected; an assumption that one isn’t welcome. Consider: ‘Who is the averse one? Who is judging me?’ Look at the face of the aversive heart and relax it. This will take you back into your body, and your heart will widen with compassion.

Dullness/sloth-torpor: You feel sleepy or unwilling to make an effort. Vitality is low or blocked. Feel what’s happening in your skin, then move your attention from your skin to your spine as you walk. Walk tall. As you get through dullness, you’ll experience restful embodied stability.

Restlessness and worry: The mind darts from this to that, endlessly making plans. Its basis is insecurity. Steady your awareness in the body, externally and internally. You’ll feel grounded and spacious.

Doubt/loss of confidence: Attention goes to thoughts that are attempting to create clarity and certainty. It constructs ideas that offer no resolution of the need to have an idea … except to have another idea. Take one step at a time; just this. An attentive and listening heart will open.

Avoid judging yourself by the presence of these hindrances. If you keep fashioning ill-will towards another, you create an enemy; if you fashion it towards yourself, the result is worse – because you can’t get away from yourself. And it gets so you can’t see things any other way. If you keep mentally fondling objects of sense-desire, your mind gets obsessed: this is the way to addiction. It’s the same with the other hindrances. With dullness, the tendency to retreat from making decisive choices diminishes responsiveness: you lose initiative. Restlessness and doubt keep you busy chasing the next distraction. All these hindrances have an effect on your energy body and mental disposition. If you refer to the subtle body, you can feel the knots and distortions that the hindrances create: face distorted, hands clenching, heart on fire. This will give you the message that your thinking mind blots out, the message of kamma: every sustained activation has an effect. In meditation we can witness how the action and even the sustained interest of the mind leaves results in the psycho-somatic system that is the foundation of our life.

These results can cramp and twist you. But there are also the bright results of clarity, goodwill and resolve. And there are those results that go further. They transform who you sense yourself as being.

Because … whenever you release a hindrance, there’s the clear and effortless entry into free, cool presence. Linger in this, take a mental photograph of that state: your subtle body feels upright, spacious and grounded; and your awareness is poised and gently vibrant. This is your undistorted, living form. Refer to this as you move through life and you’ll increasingly relinquish any negative potential.

FOOTPRINTS

1 WALKING SUPPORTS THE CLEARING OF HINDRANCES BY BRINGING THE MOBILE BODY INTO AWARENESS. THIS HELPS TO CURTAIL FIXATION ON HINDERING THEMES AND ENERGIES. KEEP THE WALKING BRIGHT AND FRESH TO CURTAIL ROBOTIC WALKING – AND THE MIND’S SLIDE INTO BOREDOM.

2 LET YOUR FEET FULLY FLEX AS YOU WALK. AS THE BACK LEG BEGINS TO PUSH THE MOVEMENT OF WALKING, ITS FOOT FLEXES FROM THE SOLE TO THE BALL OF THE FOOT ONTO THE TOES – WHICH ADD THEIR PUSH TO LIFT THE FOOT. THERE IS A SPRINGINESS TO THE MOVEMENT THAT HELPS TO KEEP THE ENERGY BRIGHT. THIS DOES NOT INVOLVE ANY EXAGGERATED MOVEMENT, OR SLOWING DOWN, JUST A FULLER AWARENESS OF THE ENGAGEMENT OF THE UNDERSIDE OF EACH FOOT WITH THE GROUND.

3 DROP YOUR AWARENESS TO YOUR BELLY, CENTRE YOURSELF THERE. YOU’RE THEN RIGHT AT THE HUB OF THE WALKING, WHERE THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN THE ABDOMEN – THE ONE THAT SENSES INSECURITY – CAN GET GENTLY MASSAGED BY THE TURNING WAIST.

4 THINGS ARISE AND PASS AT THEIR OWN RATE, NOT IN ACCORDANCE WITH YOUR WISHES AND RESISTANCES. YOU HAVE TO ALLOW THINGS TO ARISE BEFORE THEY CAN PASS. OTHERWISE HINDRANCES GET BURIED, ADOPT WEIRD ENERGIES AND IMAGES, AND THE HEART AND INNER BODY LOSE CAPACITY.