Sidetrack

Keeping A Cool Head

It was day five of the ten-day retreat; the mid-afternoon walking period to be more precise. Or the realm of ‘sloth-torpor’ as far as Katryn was concerned. Her attention struggled, sank and flailed around trying to find something firm to hold onto as a fog of low energy settled over her. …It was all so–oooo dreary. She even tried imagining having a giant sloth wrapped around her as a way to bring some energy into the mind. But the glue of her mind couldn’t even stick that together. …Why bother?

She had never liked walking meditation that much. Plodding to and fro, occasionally glimpsing her fellow inmates, heads down, shoulders hunched, doing the same – a jail sentence. Over the twelve retreats she’d done in the last eight years, Katryn had tried it from time to time, but often sneaked off to do some Tai Ch’i – which felt like a better way to spend an hour. But since she was about to become a nun, she reckoned that she had better get used to discipline and to not doing what she wanted … even though Ajahn Paññadharā had allowed people to find what worked for them.

She had also instructed them to be aware of the entire body as they walked, and to walk with a sense of balance rather than focus on the footsteps alone. ‘Back – OK. Shoulders – stiff; neck too. How can I get out of this?’ Katryn started pacing a little faster, putting more flex into her waist and allowing her arms to swing free. After a while, that felt a bit better, but all this trying…! And urgh! Now a sharp breeze was chewing her neck and newly-shaved scalp. But at least the aversion gave her something to work with.

‘I am aware of aversion. My awareness notices ill-will. My awareness is not the ill-will.’ She experienced a sliver of detachment as she witnessed the tangles and clutches of aversion. That glimpse of openness! It was what she was going forth for. …Mysterious and quiet, it was the only thing she’d found in thirty years that was truly reliable – and, at times, really wonderful. …

Then the breeze dropped, and the dull state of mind began creeping back. She really hated that… so went back to a more vigorous stride… up and down. And then she realized – aversion to dullness! Right there was the heavy fog … and here was awareness. … Her pace slowed down. There was the sense of the skin wrapped around her face like a thick damp rag … and the resistance to it. And here, somewhere, she was relaxing the ill-will. ‘This is just low vitality,’ she thought. ‘It’s just the way energy goes. Stop fighting.’

Something opened to and met that thick damp rag. Awareness wasn’t dreary. ‘Awareness is just what it always is.’ Outbreath. She didn’t feel much more lively, but there was a calm, cool presence in the midst of that. It began to trickle down her back as she walked … and slowly the tightness in her neck began to ease up. This was a different body; looser in some sense. … Its form was not so hard-edged; there was more space inside, and the feet seemed to be even enjoying the earth. … A subtle ease washed over her… ‘Don’t try too hard…’

Gon-n-ng!! Time! People were starting to move back to the meditation hall for the next sitting … an hour had passed. Katryn stood there for a while, sensing her changes, quietly aware and unhurried.

A scratchy sensation arose at the edge of her awareness – it was her head. A cool wind was scraping it. ‘Sharpening its claws,’ she thought. ‘Scalp massage ...’ Fingers tucked into the woolly hat in her pocket, she followed the others back to the hall.