COMPASS POINTS

CAUSE AND EFFECT

The term ‘kamma’ refers to the process of cause and effect. The causal aspect is called ‘new kamma’ and the resultant effect is called ‘old kamma’ (vipāka).

‘New kamma’ refers to the choices that we act upon now. It means that every decisive action that is carried out by means of body, speech/thought and mental fixation has its results – for our welfare or not. Consequently the results are laid down in the heart – where they form habits and mental dispositions – and in the reflexes of the body's energy system. This is the ‘old kamma’ of habits, memories, attitudes and reflexes, and it carries the potential for fresh kamma. To put it simply, we will tend to act in terms of our acquired habits and learned behaviour. The actual launch of that potential into fresh kamma is intention (cetanā) – the shaping of a response to whatever impacts awareness. It is a leader in the saṅkhāra process. However, ‘intention’ is not necessarily a well-considered choice; it’s the ‘do it’ energy that arises in the heart. It may be a blurred reaction, a choice made under pressure, or a social obligation. The liberating point is that old kamma merely establishes the potential for action; we can notice it and choose to act differently.

This point is given a deeper significance by the fact that intention is a saṅkhāra, and so it establishes patterns for our responses. These patterns become psychologies and embodied reflexes that form us. We are moulded by them, become them, and give our life’s energy to perpetuating them.

This view of kamma encourages us to make conscious choices rather than glide on automatic; to take responsibility for our actions rather than follow a social trend; and to investigate our attitudes, responses and reactions. Of course what to do in any situation is not always clear, but the mind will default to habit and established norms, so the most generally useful choice to make is to get clear about one’s mind, what motivates it and what thoughts or emotional responses are worth following. In this respect, although action/kamma can be carried out by the body, by speech and even by mental fixation and bias, the roots of it are in the heart. In order to access those roots, we tune in to the heart and to the energy of intention as it is felt in the body. Mindfully attuned to these, we can contemplate how intentions and activations based on goodwill, conscience and concern, and empathy give rise to reliable and benevolent states – such as ease, openness and alertness: good kamma. On the other hand, worry, resentment, greed and aversion lead to muddy or inflamed states of tension, agitation and defensiveness. These don’t feel good, because they’re not good: that’s bad kamma.

It therefore becomes important for one’s mindfulness to handle and get perspective on these kamma-forming patterns. This is made possible through bringing awareness into a place where energy is in balance, willpower ceases and intention stops. This may occur in walking when you allow the body to flow along – so that thinking quietens down and awareness settles into its open centre. From here you can review the causes and conditions of kamma, learn how to engage, and explore how letting go happens – so that habitual patterns don’t take form.