Questions and Answers

Q I like the idea of walking meditation ... but I don’t have much space. And I don’t have much time.

A I appreciate that, in city life, it’s not easy to find a path you can do meditation on without other people intruding or thinking you’re crazy. And homes are constricted. But when I was in Thailand, I walked inside my small hut (on account of mosquitoes) and that measured six or seven paces, wall to wall. Nowadays, I sometimes use a woodland path near where I live. It’s not absolutely straight, or even – but I doubt if the paths in the jungle at the time of the Buddha were utterly smooth and straight. We’re humans, not trains. However, clearing unnecessary stuff out of your sight is important, as this supports a felt sense of space.

Also, when you get familiar with the body’s natural way of walking, you can use that in your daily life to check the momentum of mental directives. Most of us walk a lot more than we acknowledge: two minutes to the bathroom, four minutes to the car, fifteen minutes to the station. I walk in airports when waiting for a plane. If you start walking in the right direction, then let go of ‘to’ and just walk, you’ll find that will help you stay balanced in the present wherever you go. And if you’re travelling on wheels, don’t race ahead with your mind.

Even more universal is the benefit of developing ‘walker’s mind’. When you’re out hiking, the paths aren’t always straight and clear, and sometimes they disappear. The land gets swampy, there’s a rockfall, a way has been fenced off – you have to be prepared to negotiate your way in accordance with what’s happening on the ground. Sometimes you can’t get through by going straight ahead, you have to backtrack a little and go left. Sometimes you have to pause, test the ground and cautiously scramble. Life is like this. Learn to be aware of what’s around you in all respects: other people, precedents and consequences. Be prepared to wait until a harmonious and balanced way forward gets clear. Above all, avoid the mental habit of going round in circles, rehashing the same old plans and narratives.

Q What do you mean by ‘feeling’ and ‘felt sense’?

A In English, ‘feeling’ refers to what the Buddha’s language covered by three terms: vedanā – the quality of pleasure or displeasure, physical or mental; saññā – meaning, perception, my immediate take on things, as in ‘that remark felt offensive’; and saṅkhāra, the movement of the heart, as in ‘I feel pretty excited at the idea.’ In this colloquial presentation, I’m referring to any of these. The exact Pali translation depends on how the word ‘feeling’ is being used.

Feeling is crucial – ‘all dhammas converge on feeling’1 was the Buddha’s remark. This is where input is registered and responded to, and its impressions mark and shape the heart with shock, grief, love, happiness, anger – and ease. So this is where body, mind and heart have to support each other by means of the pleasant feeling that comes with wholesome conduct and meditative skills.

However we may take an idea – like ‘mindfulness’ or ‘compassion’ – and try to apply what we think it means, without actually getting a feel of what’s happening in the citta. You have the right idea, but you aren’t necessarily applying it to the right place in an appropriate way. This is where the ‘felt sense’ is a guide. It arises where saññā touches the citta; it’s the resonance that occurs when a meaning or impression arises in the heart. Energy shifts and you ‘get it.’ If you’re mindful of that, or compassionate towards it, there will be a skilful resonance and a change for the better. With skilful states, you might get brightness or uplift, or even an image.

This is also useful when one feels stuck in unwholesome states: you ask yourself, ‘What is the feel of this?’ And instead of ‘confused’ or ‘irritated’, you refer to the embodied sense, not the verbal label. Hence the felt sense – which may be a sense of oppressive denseness, or of a tangle, or of weight. Then you float the inquiry: ‘What does this need?’ Put aside any verbal answer about what you should do, and you might get an embodied direct response – an image of light, or a sense of space or some other resonance.

Feeling is the quality of direct experience; we get something when we feel it. Until then, it’s just an idea. The Buddha remarked that whenever there’s a breakthrough in terms of realization, that is also felt2. You might say realization is accompanied by a feeling of relief.

Q How do I ‘drop’ my awareness to my abdomen?

A As an example of how this happens, ask someone to slowly move their hand towards your body – maybe to the shoulder or abdomen – and notice what happens. … When their hand gets quite close, you’ll feel that part of your body light up. If you close your eyes and move your own hand towards your face, the same thing happens. Right? Your body’s awareness, or receptivity, heightens to receive that impending contact. Its awareness has moved and heightened. Now, you can do the same thing with your citta or heart. The way I’d put it is: Get really interested in what’s happening in, say, your forehead, the centre of your chest, the palms of your hands, soles of your feet … etc. Relax these areas, and just be curious in a friendly way. Any of these areas will then come to the fore of your attention; they might even warm or tingle. In this way, you build up a focus that’s sensitive.

I imagine that we’d agree that sustaining a focus is one of the necessary features of meditation … but how you do that is important. Now we could prioritize attention: decide you’re going to focus on your feet or your diaphragm or wherever, then apply yourself to that. What would be the state of your awareness then? I imagine you’d be aware of focusing and fixing your attention, with the aim to keep it on that chosen place and eventually get concentrated. That is, you’d be receptive to your ideas and intentions and efforts. Hmmm. How tuned in is that? It’s all about your notions of meditation and getting a result, and very little to do with your body. And your awareness receives that attitude and motivation – it’s all about doing and trying. You’d be mindful of that. How does that feel?

Now the approach that I’m recommending is to get interested and sensitive. Like you’re listening. You turn an open interest towards your body, maybe an area that’s easy to sense, like your hands, or to an entire mode or posture, as with walking. So how does a body walk? Get interested to feel it in its movements and shift of weight and balance. Get interested in putting other things aside for a while; get interested in how the skin feels, and how it knows the space immediately touching it. In this way, your citta’s intention is led by interest. It can gently explore the sensations and energies that are happening in the body. It can extend its basic friendliness, and that makes the experience comfortable but alert.

It can only do that if your mind relaxes a little and allows awareness to take the lead. Awareness is a fundamental property of the heart, and bringing it to the fore in a comfortable but fully conscious way is a means to free the heart from agitation, despond, and passion. So in walking (as in the other postures) you extend awareness to the steady and comfortable base of the body. Mindful of that, you’ll find that the vital energy of walking, or of breathing, is the most brightening and comfortable theme for your practice. As awareness settles into that, attention builds up, mindfulness strengthens and embodied energy comes to the fore. That energy is not forceful, nor is it doing anything other than maintaining living presence. Unlike the mind, it’s not doing anything other than being what it is. So mental intentions and preoccupations can drop away; you don’t need them. Sensations quieten down and the citta’s awareness collects into itself. Isn’t this what is meant by samādhi (concentration)? An awareness that’s free from hindrances and unified?

Well, I seem to have veered off topic! Or maybe it’s an aspect of the ongoing one. That is: how do you bring stress and pain to an end? Where can you find the support and resources to dig out some embedded stuff and tap into joy? In what mode can you keep this practice going through the ups and downs? The beauty is that you have the potential and the resources right here. In a nutshell, there’s a wisdom that naturally clarifies out of your mind as you clear the obstructions. And that discernment, that wisdom, is based on awareness. So get interested in that, and learn to move it, extend it, soften and steady it. This will be for your long-lasting welfare and benefit.

Q I’m a bit confused: is awareness in your heart, your body or your mind?

A Awareness is the receptive aspect of consciousness – viññāna – and in body-consciousness and mind-consciousness, it is particularly acute. These bases feel and formulate the input of sight, sound and touch (etc.) in terms of happiness and unhappiness, and ease and stress. Body wants to know whether something is a threat or a delight, preferably before physical contact occurs, and mind is set up to judge that in advance. This judgment is based on how the mind interprets or ‘perceives’ things. This is so important that the receptive aspect of mind opens up to derive feelings out of what are only perceptions – and come up with responses. The deepening of receptivity allows consciousness to be ‘known’; i.e. there is awareness, ñāna, of what consciousness with its feelings is bringing in. Awareness is centred in the place of feeling and response – that is, ‘citta’ or heart.

The body also has a way of knowing. This is through the subtle energy network of the ‘inner’ body that tingles and tenses, reacts and relaxes. This knowing is experienced as presence. However citta does most of the day-to-day responding to all kinds of perceptions, meanings, memories and impressions. It is awareness plus. In this area, awareness can be trained – to withdraw from unwholesome responses, to move to locations in the body, to stay still and widen and so on. And the mind can notice all that, gain understanding and give suggestions to the heart as to its responses. At times, when the citta is at ease and steady, the mind can just stop, because no advice or comment is needed. Then the mental awareness is clear and still.

So, awareness can preside over all acts of consciousness, and also when consciousness stops. In pragmatic terms, I’d suggest you go to the quiet place in your heart.

1. At A.10:58

2. As in: There is effort to attain what hasn’t been attained. When that stage has been reached, there is also feeling based on that. (S.45:11)