COMPASS POINTS

PROGRAMS, TENDENCIES AND SKILFUL QUALITIES

With ‘programs’ I am referring to saṅkhārā again, but at a psychological level, where the thinking mind contributes to the emotional movements of cittasaṅkhāra to formulate strategies in response to the inner environment. This is vacīsaṅkhāra, the conceptual energy that we employ to plan our days, assess other people and what we should be in a range of circumstances. It creates maps. It carries the emotional charge of the citta – but that isn’t always evident, as this charge is obscured by views and opinions as to how things should be and what is normal and the right thing to do. It may murmur that ‘they expect me to be …’ without being clear who ‘they’ are and whether their opinions are valid. It may state ‘it needs me to do this’ without knowing where ‘it’ is. In other words, these programs obscure the agent of our actions – compulsive programs based on fear/insecurity. This obscuration is called ‘ignorance’, avijja. Clarity (vijja) is needed.

Avijja is the basis of underlying dispositions called ‘tendencies’ (anusaya). Among ones you’d expect, such as the tendency to greed and to ill-will, are such tendencies as the disposition towards ‘becoming’ (bhava), or building a self-image; and tendencies towards views. As these well up into circumstantial life, they form outflows (āsavā) that flood our minds. Ever heard the inner voice proclaim that ‘I’m right’– or the even more insidious one that ‘I’m always wrong?’ Who is that? Is walking right or wrong?

As views so often form our foundation for life – views about politics, aesthetics, customs, religion – they frame our conversation, friendships and even our identity. They are also the first of these tendencies that can be relinquished – through recognizing that views are always sketches of a reality that is fluid and subjectively felt. Views may be handy at times for making approximate decisions, but basically, they’re attempts to steer a river. So the foundation for Dhamma practice is Right View, that is, the perspective on whether mind-states, attitudes, actions and views flow towards wholesome results or not. This view encourages you to trace the source of your subjective world in the shifts, drives and fog of the heart.

Through contemplative practice such discernment establishes clarity. And this develops into the understanding that leads to the end of stress: that all manifest experiences are subject to change (anicca), to being incomplete (dukkha), and are not controlled or belonging to a self (anattā). Such a view leaves reality open and free.

Whereas tendencies and acquired programs go against this view, walking is especially easy to see in terms of these characteristics. It’s always changing – otherwise there is no walking. It’s always non-arriving – once you arrive, you stop walking – and pretty soon, you move on. As for ‘not-self’: the mechanics of walking aren’t based on your identity – only a living body with functioning legs and energy can walk. (And that can change.)

In order to establish clarity, programs can be opened up by dhamma-inquiry. For example, to look into agency with the inquiry ‘Who?’ ‘Why?’ is a useful probe to send into a ‘It should be like this.’ And ‘How does this feel in my body?’ is universally applicable. They reveal the emotional habit that powers our programs. Through managing that, we can withdraw energy from it, or get it in perspective.

Don’t forget that although the offspring of ignorance are many and vigorous, the citta has extensive beneficial qualities, qualities that are inherent but can be developed to support clarity and dispel ignorance. Any book on Buddhist practice will inform you of ‘support faculties’ ‘paths to success’ and ‘enlightenment factors’. Any correct meditation will encourage mindfulness, goodwill and wisdom. But here I would briefly mention qualities that walking in particular brings forth. Resolve (adhiṭṭhāna)– walking keeps on going, so you can bring persistence into your practice. Energy (viriya) is part of that, and in walking you get the support of the steady vitality of the engaged body. Finally: dhamma-inquiry (dhammavicaya) – your attention and awareness are encouraged to move through the entire body as it moves. So you get less stuck in states, and can explore how they change.

What you’ll move towards is a blend of balance and supple strength. That then becomes a guiding sign for your ongoing sitting meditation – and your life.