SIDETRACK

WALKING LIKE THIS

‘It’s like this now ... it’s like this now. ...’ The memo fitted his stumping pace – left foot, right foot – and gave his mind a point, a safe point, a moment at a time. The jab of pain in his right leg was also reassuring. It was here, manageable, in reliable flickers that reached into his lower back. After he came out of military hospital, they’d told him that he’d never get the flexibility back in his right side, and that he’d always have a limp ... but at least he had a leg. The left leg and side did most of the work. Twelve paces up and down the corridor.

The rest of the meditation group were sitting in the room in the centre that they rented on a weekly basis. They were good people, and he enjoyed the company. Easy and accepting, they knew how to listen. He had a chair by the door, where he’d listen to the recorded talks that they played. That’s how he’d picked up his meditation phrase. Simple, it brought him back to the immediate present, and, as he never felt that comfortable being in the room when it quietened down and the lights went dim, he took it with him to the corridor outside.

Even then, it wasn’t easy at first to walk for long in the silence, unaware of what was behind him. But the reminder that the group was in the adjacent room, the steadily repeated phrase, and the uneven gait – they all gave his mind a grounding. Sometimes it would sink into the rhythm, then jump out to check the walls on either side of him. ‘All clear,’ he’d think. ‘It’s ... like ... this ... now.’

More recently in those dips into the shuffling rhythm, a memory would rise up ... of swimming when he was a boy. He was a dreamy kid in those days, playing at being a strange water-creature. To be held by the soft strength of the river as it opened around him – what that was like ... If he lingered on it, the memory helped his chest to open and his shoulders to relax. It could also be like this now. ‘Like ... this ... like ... this ... like ... this.’ When he carried that, the other memories held back and the space felt different, less hard and edgy.

And if he came into his chest as it turned with the walking ... at times it was as if there was a light strapped to it, a light whose main beam probed an arc in front of him. Like the rifle he used to carry on patrol. All safe. ‘No harm,’ he thought. ‘No ... harm ... be … well ... no ... harm…’ It felt precarious and shaky, and things were tingling inside. But he knew he wanted to keep walking.

‘Like this …. like this …’