COMPASS POINTS

THE SUBTLE BODY AND ME

The term ‘subtle body’ is used to give a map to the patterns and processes of the subtle energy that flows through the body and is referred to as kāyasaṅkhāra, ‘bodily formation,’ or ‘bodily activation’. Other traditions recognize it in terms of chakras and meridians.

Kāyasaṅkhāra is the vitality of the body, and it’s sensitive to bodily reflexes as well as to the heart-energy that responds to feeling: emotion. We can notice how it lights up in predictable ways according to different signals: threat will probably tighten your belly and shoulders and send power energy to your limbs. Love and joy will most likely flush your face. When activated, these vitality reflexes forms a network, a ‘formation’. Through this, the body takes on a hard or soft, closed or open form. At rest state it’s the energy-pattern of breathing; this subtle body is not of the senses, yet it’s dynamically alive.

Except that it’s not always like this: it gets cramped, numbed and closed down. Imbalance in the subtle body isn’t unusual: it get hyperactive and prevent us from sleeping at night. We can blame it all on the mind, and certainly both manas and citta have to accept responsibility, but they can only set up the conditions for the kāyasaṅkhāra to come into balance. Mindfulness of the subtle body shows them how to do that. Otherwise, a lot of the time, our ideas and imbalanced intentions are part of the problem.

Very fundamentally, a dynamic process that moves energy, and is attuned to affect and response, needs to have a ‘discharge, return to rest state’ phase in its cycle. To say it in another way: when most of your energy is about doing, you need to have an undoing. The simplest way of bringing this about is to acknowledge the shape your subtle body is in (all head, and no feet; or, cramped in the shoulders; or, buzzing and scattered; or, like a hard case around your torso) and while mindful of that, widen and extend your attention to cover your entire body. This will create a wider container for your energy. When it is gathered by the rhythmic processes of walking to and fro, breathing in and out, or chanting, this energy will gradually fill your body. Then as the kāyasaṅkhāra regains its wholeness, it naturally discharges and refreshes itself.

Yes, but there is the mind – and the heart. You might have guessed how the imbalances in the subtle body happen: high-pressure work, a history of insecurity and performance drives, addictive passion, an absence of welcome. And either by oneself or others, these are psychologically induced. In terms of the language structures I’m using, induced perceptions and activations such as these stir and press the citta into craving to succeed, gain or be approved of. We learn to enter a race that no-one can win: the race to perfection; the quest for security where it can’t be found; the aim to be a constantly loved and flawless self. These drives are called ‘distortions’ (vipallasa) – they direct our minds to distort our hearts. The heart is then on an impossible quest, it gets unbalanced, and the vitality of the subtle body pays the price.

The nature of saṅkhārā is that they form patterns. That is, they form and store habits; they ‘remember’. Some patterns are unpleasant and even worse, damaging. What is the difference? Say you’re threatened: you experience fear, the energy runs through you and your body tightens up – but you find a way to get grounded, keep your cool and face the threat until it leaves. You’re upset, that was unpleasant – but you calm down. Another option: you run away, get safe, and the threatening force passes. You feel confident again and return to balance. But, if you experience threat, and you can’t stand your ground, run away, or get help, because the threat is the person who lives with you and is bigger and smarter – you stay in fear mode. If this state of affairs persists, your intentions and actions will adopt patterns of fear and anxiety – even when the current external situation is not threatening. Your citta has been shaped by fear, and it will project that inner pattern onto your external circumstances. That’s damage. And external circumstances can’t help you to get out of that pattern. Only internal change can.

Internally, kāyasaṅkhāra and cittasaṅkhāra share the same subtle body’s response network. So, if the heart hasn’t been able to come up with a suitable response, the trigger (say fear) is frozen into a pattern in the subtle body. The network might go numb when a perception evokes comparison and therefore potential blame. Then we don’t feel anything, but keep acting in a numb way. In such a case, one needs to find and listen to the subtle body. When you notice stress or imbalance in that felt territory, bring awareness to that, widen and introduce the query: ‘What does this need?’ Carefully cultivated, this invites the kāyasaṅkhāra into an open space, that of unpressurized inquiry. The openness, rather than any answer, allows the heart to open – and as the citta regains feeling, the pattern begins to release.

Such a process affects your sense of self – which is based on the patterns of saṅkhārā. So it can feel disorienting. However if we take the time to walk ourselves day after day back to balance and wholeness, the beauty and vitality of the heart is restored. How long does it take? Well, do you have anything better to do?