SIDETRACK

SAMIRA WALKS HEARTFUL

Samira didn’t like her garden path. She wanted to practise some of the walking meditation that she’d learnt about at the daylong last weekend. But whereas at the Jivita Center she’d been able to find a good straight path of twenty-five paces, at home, her garden path was only fifteen and had a bend in it. It was difficult to see how she could get into a precise and unbroken state of mindfulness on that.

Mind you, the day at Jivita had also had its difficulties. She was used to adding a period of quiet sitting after her evening yoga session, but walking was a new thing. It seemed complicated – how was she supposed to synchronize focusing on the sensations in her feet with her hips, shoulders and whatever her spine was doing? And what to do with her hands? When she asked the teacher, he gave her a quizzical look and said: ‘Just walk like you’re happy. You know – heartful.’

Happy! What had mindfulness to do with being happy? The daylong was called ‘Clarity and Calm’ – and to her that meant a clear focus and an unwavering attention. But on what? Not that it was possible to be happy at the retreat anyway: there was an old guy who slouched along, head down, hands in his pockets – oblivious to the fact that he was transecting her walking path – or maybe it was on purpose! Then there was the girl wearing a hideous orange tee-shirt that clashed with her bright blue pants, and who kept strolling by mumbling some kind of mantra. How was one supposed to be mindful when surrounded by weird people?

At least her garden path offered some solitude. So she started, counting her footsteps in a measured stride. At step eleven she had to swing with the bend, and that brought a nasty patch of weeds into her field of vision. So she inclined her head down, got to the end of the path, turned – and felt a tug on her sweater. A straggling shoot of the rose bush had snagged her. Making a note to snip that later, Samira continued to pace up and down, although the bend and turn broke the regularity of her stride.

Losing the momentum of her walking, she began to feel uncomfortable… and suddenly felt a compulsive need to snip that bush and pull out those weeds – right now…! A ripple of acute agitation rushed up from her belly... tightened her throat, snatched her breath ... and a wave of sorrow broke over her.

It was Leah! Leah, her sister. Their mother had phoned her to pass on the message that Leah didn’t want to see her this week; she was quite weak from the radiation treatment and needed to rest. Samira had phoned Leah immediately, and her elder sister, true to form, had been more direct. ‘Sam, I don’t need five alternative remedies, I’m OK with what I’ve got. I don’t need to study a website. I don’t need to learn some breathing technique to improve my oxygen intake. I’m not interested in developing a positive attitude towards my body and visualizing it chomping cancer cells. And please keep your diet to yourself. I just need to operate at my pace in my way.’

Oh Leah! Didn’t she know how much Samira loved her tough bright sister? With tears in her eyes, Samira felt the rose bush tugging at her sleeve again. One of the blooms was withering away, a small bud was beginning to open. ‘My pace, my way’: Leah’s words rang through her as she felt a huge involuntary out-breath release her belly and chest. Gently unhooking the thorn, she let her feet and legs carry her, tears running down her face, in a meandering loop that strayed over the grass to connect both ends of her path in a long figure of eight. Yes, all she could do was hold Leah in her heart and let it overflow. So here it was: the neighbours’ dog was yapping, the weeds were bobbing their heads, the compost was stinking – and somewhere Leah was pushing through. And Samira was walking, face wet with tears, not that happy – but heartful.