How Bodies Walk

And Why We Need To Know

Before we go into the finer details of walking meditation, it’s probably the case that you don’t really know in directly-experienced detail how a body walks. And so you miss out on the benefits of walking. The first thing you might need to acknowledge then is that your accustomed way of walking isn’t even focused on your body but on the idea of where you’re going. So let’s take a few moments to check out how a body walks.

Stand with your weight evenly distributed on both feet. Relax your upper body and head and feel your legs carrying you. Let a few breaths pass through; get settled. Then decide to take a careful but relaxed step. What happens? First your body shifts its weight to one leg. One hip (say the right side) takes the weight of the body and transfers it down through the right leg and foot and into the floor beneath you. The entire right leg from hip to foot engages. Let the right knee bend a little in order to strengthen the stance. As the movement continues, with the spine rotating slightly to the left, you can feel the muscles in the lower back at the left side of the pelvis tighten to lift the left leg. As those same muscles lift the left leg, the heel of the left foot comes off the ground and the swing begins. There’s a slight push from the toes, the leg muscles lift the knee – so that the lower leg swings forward and the foot can descend to the floor. With the foot settling on the floor to carry the weight of the body, the spine turns back to the right. At a relaxed pace, the movement takes about a second.

Re-run that small movement, this time focusing on the mind. First stand and relax, feeling the balance. In this way, awareness, the receptive sense, will spread over your entire body. Attention then forms a focus that limits awareness to the sense of ‘body’. Consequently awareness of your body deepens to include its poise, steadiness, solidity and warmth. You’re fully ‘embodied’. In this condition, awareness is particularly attuned to the important matter of balance as you stand, and to synchronicity as you move. Accordingly, as you initiate walking, your attention first goes to the pelvis and waist to establish a steady centre, and then extends down the weight-bearing leg. Awareness then tells you that your weight is fully supported. Next comes the intention to lift the leg, the body responds, and your attention widens to include the stable leg, the moving leg and the upper body. It needs to cover the whole body so that, even as the momentum carries the weight to the front leg and initiates the next step, the counterbalance in the upper body allows for a smooth transfer of weight. Without that, you lurch forward or fall over.

If you want to continue into walking, these three mental qualities – awareness, attention and intention will have to stay linked, so that you don’t lose balance (loss of awareness), or look at or think about something else (distracted attention), or change your mind and switch on your phone (unsteady intention). So, to maintain embodied composure you have to keep the whole package in mind and connected to the actuality of what the body is doing – this ‘keeping in mind’ is mindfulness placed on the body. You keep awareness (the receptive) attention (the creator of focus) and intention (the agent of movement) engaged with the process of walking. One immediate benefit is that the mind doesn’t engage with the hundred and one other things that a mind can engage with. Mindfulness contains and calms.

Of course, your mind is used to engaging with ideas, possibilities and concerns, and it moves fast – so sustaining mindfulness of the body presents challenges: it seems that your mind can’t go that slow, it needs something to do. Well, here’s where walking will help and is easier than sitting still. Because, with mindful walking, you engage your mind with the shifts and changes that accompany movement of the body. Because that movement is undertaking the potentially risky process of balancing on one leg while the other glides through the air, awareness does attune to it. So the body’s intelligence is automatically tuned in to balance – but, because the body does the job so well, your mind normally doesn’t bother to engage with the process. The encouragement then is to stay directly aware and alert to how walking happens, with the intention to move in a composed and fluid way. As to why … through a mindful engagement, the balance and poise of walking can reach into the mind and heart. For example, if you’re thinking and worrying about what could or should be, acknowledge that, draw your attention back to the simple steady movement of walking and keep it there – and the worrying will subside.

With mindful walking, we’re undoing mental perspectives wherein you lose balanced presence – such as the notion of getting somewhere, either in terms of physical space or a mental state. This spacious, unhurried state is enjoyable. If you tune in to how the whole body walks, you pick up a flowing and rhythmic process; it’s something you can sustain, it’s not tiring. Mindful walking has an ease and vitality that calms mind and heart; and because that is enjoyable, sustaining an interest gets easier.

This process involves the whole body – feet don’t walk. They obviously play a part, but it’s a group effort in which the leader is in the pelvic-lumbar region where the hip and lumbar muscles turn the spine and lift the leg. To get the whole group engaged, you have to relax in your abdomen so that the body flexes at the waist. That relaxing is important. Then the spinal turn will by itself draw the corresponding side of the upper body slightly back to act as a counterbalance. Don’t make a deliberate effort – just relax, widen your attention and awareness to include your upper body, and as you turn your spine, stay tuned in to balance. The body will form a counterbalance by means of the upper body, such that you can even pause with your foot in the air without tightening up to stay upright. (If these words are confusing, try walking up some stairs, and notice how when the left leg goes forward and up, the left shoulder turns slightly back.)

As the walking continues, the foot arrives on the ground centred in front of you to accept the weight of your body. Then the process of shifting weight and coordinating the whole body in the movement repeats. It’s rhythmic. And mediating that rhythmic interplay are the muscles that lightly turn the spine and flex your waist.

That might not have happened in your usual way of walking, because normally you’re aiming to get somewhere and so there’s a tension in the body that keeps the waist locked and the abdomen tight. In this ‘stride-march-scurry’ mode, awareness isn’t in the body, so you don’t notice the lack of synchronicity. The tightness and the momentum of striding along keeps you from falling over, but drive and tension replace embodied awareness, balance and ease.

With embodied awareness, you put aside that ‘going somewhere’ assumption and the effects it has. By so doing, you find here-and-now balance, and as your mind notices the absence of pressure it shifts into awareness of flow. This is not a matter of moving very slowly – your body can maintain that flow even while running. So you can still go places. The point is to let the body do the walking in a way that feels light and poised. This is not based on sensations, but on balance and synchronicity. If you sustain awareness of these, the mind is guided towards its own balance, free from the pressure of time and destinations. Thoughts may arise, but they’re less tightly bound, and they lose their grip on your heart.

With this increased spaciousness and skill, you can contemplate any stress – and allow it to unravel. Mindful of that, your awareness picks up and absorbs qualities of lightness, openness and poise. It becomes a quiet open centre across which thoughts and energies can move, and into which they can rest. That’s enjoyable, useful – and rare.

It also teaches us something about the body. It’s not just a matter of meat and bones and tactile sensations. It’s also the guiding intelligence whereby a gymnast or a dancer or a Tai Ch’i master maintains a cool alert poise in the midst of circumstances. That’s what most of us, perhaps all of us, need to know.

FOOTPRINTS

1 STAND UPRIGHT, WEIGHT BALANCED ON BOTH FEET, RELAX IN THE LEGS, CHEST AND BELLY. YOUR FEET WILL FEEL MORE RECEPTIVE IF YOU WEAR SOFT FLEXIBLE FOOTWEAR, OR EVEN BETTER, GO BAREFOOT.

2 KEEP YOUR EYES ON SOFT FOCUS, EVEN SLIGHTLY DOWNCAST – BUT DON’T TIP YOUR HEAD OVER AS THIS WILL CAUSE STRESS IN THE NECK AND SUPPORT UNNECESSARY THINKING.

3 TAKE A FEW TENTATIVE STEPS WITH THE AIM TO BREAK OUT OF THE ‘GOING SOMEWHERE’ MOOD. BRING MORE ATTENTION TO THE PELVIC-LUMBAR MASS AND LET THAT MOVE THE LEGS. PRIORITIZE WHOLE-BODY AWARENESS, BALANCE AND FLOW.

4 DON’T DEFINE A PATH AT FIRST, JUST ENJOY SOME AIMLESS WANDERING. THIS WILL HELP YOU TO READ THE BODY’S MOVEMENT AND RHYTHM. BEWARE OF ‘TRACK MENTALITY’ AS THIS WILL CREATE A RESTRICTIVE DRIVE IN THE MIND.

5 NOTE THAT BUZZY, PUSHY ENERGY OF 'THERE’S SOMETHING TO DO, SOMEWHERE ELSE'. THAT’S WHAT WE’RE LEARNING TO GUIDE AND MASTER, NOT TO FOLLOW. FLOW INTO WALKING.