Noble Path

As you establish mindfulness in the walking body and fill it with awareness, you’ll have less need to concern yourself with the physical details. Instead you’ll be able to abide in qualities such as suppleness, fluidity, vitality and balance; qualities that go straight to the heart. Here they undermine the program of unawakened walking with its top-heavy, numb-footed drive; and in doing so, release the corresponding stress and constriction from the heart. That bright heart can then guide you on the walk through your life.

In embodied practice, we’re aiming to release the stress that the pressures of time, destination, and a need to get ahead condition into the heart. We can notice how these compress and numb the subtle body, so that its wholeness gets broken into an overcharged head riding on a mechanical body. Attention is then on what is in front of the body (or actually to the fore of the mind) and to the face; awareness is confined to what occurs within that form.

Other than having a physically de-vitalizing effect, this also puts stressful psychological programs in charge of our life. The result is a lessened capacity for warm-heartedness and flexibility, and an increased tendency for irritability and compulsive, automatic behaviour. These psychological programs don’t only arise while walking, but this movement in particular brings up the felt sense of what we move through, and how: our environment. Although this environment seems external, it is psychologically tinted. And it can be cleared and reset by walking with full balanced presence.

You’ll notice that when there is the sense of having to push through, ward off or grab at something in an unsympathetic environment, stressful programs arise. For example, in dense traffic, there are ‘drive forward’ programs that can escalate to aggression if thwarted. In shared spaces, defence programs may switch on to hold our own against others. They make us hard and spiky. As do the control programs that react to signals of insecurity. There are also destination/gratification programs – to get to that sweet spot and hang on to it in order to compensate for the depletion and lack of warmth in the world in general. And there are distraction or numbing programs to blot out the discord created by the others.

These psychologically-tinted environments and programs act as a foundation for attitudes about ourself and the world around us, attitudes that give rise to afflictive emotions and hyperactive thinking. This is the territory of ‘acquisitions’ (upadhi), or stuck programs. Some of these reflex strategies get established through unresolved grief, shock or trauma. So, although we may not have created these programs by choice but out of a necessity to deal with what has happened to us, following them has the kammic effect of shaping us in ways that determine our present and future. To put it bluntly, if you keep running the stuck programs, they run you.

These programs are reflexes that prevent the heart from meeting aspects of our relationships with others that have been internalized and become personal history. But in so doing, they also obstruct a clearing of the past. The result is that the heart, rather like a broken arm in a sling, loses flexibility, vitality and joy. Of course, we can’t fix the past ... but now the programs of defence, distraction and denial can be undone.

Although psychological programs affect the subtle body and become aspects of ‘me’, the body has its own learning program. It’s open to input, so it learns how to balance, walk, swim, dance, skate, do headstands, and give birth. ...It shivers when it’s cold; and when the heart feels social embarrassment, or the pressure of work, it tenses up. In brief, it picks up signals from its inner and outer environment. And, just as negative programs arise when we move through our psychologically closed environment, there’s the possibility of walking out of that into the non-intrusive external environment and the ‘no pressure’ inner environment of meditation. Through settling into this, there can be an arrival into the open territory of unconstricted awareness. You just have to undo the contracted form of your inner body and return to the natural state that supports its learning and skill.

You can’t resolve a program by pushing or clamping down on it, but, by restoring the natural intelligence of the subtle body, its reflexes can be cleared. Any embodied meditation will support this, but in walking, the resetting process is given support by the dynamics of balance and flow. This transmits groundedness, ease and bright vitality to the heart that is immersed in it.

The beauty of the heart is that if it’s not confused, pressurized or absent, its natural intelligence finds skilful ways of meeting the ups and downs of life. If this were not the case, there would be no chance for authentic, realizable peace and awakening. However, because the heart does get infected and depleted by confused aims, passions and short-term attention, and because it acts upon them and acquires damaging habits, the return to this natural state takes patient effort. It’s the kind of effort that is needed to walk with no intention other than to stay balanced and fill the body with awareness; but as you do this, there can be a relinquishment of out-of-date reflexes and defective programs.

So walk in a way that is natural to the body. Let the body walk free from fixed attitudes (as in the ‘get there’, ‘get concentrated’ disposition), imbalance (walking led by the eyes and head rather than the turning spine and the legs), and mental preoccupation. Some teachers recommend that, as mindfulness is established, we trust the natural intelligence of awareness to clear hindrances and programs. Then, just as when a bucket of muddy water is settled on steady ground, the mud will sink to the bottom to leave clean water, so, a mind that rests on stable ground will discard its confused habits.

In this analogy, attention is the bucket, intention places it on the ground and holds it steady, and awareness is the water. But for awareness to get clear of the mud it has to stay in the bucket and clearly know water is water and mud is mud. It all sounds natural enough. ...

However there is an agitator lurking in all this: the sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ with its history and preferences. This does get the bucket rocking and leaking. True enough, this psycho-somatic territory feels like me: the hindrances and stuck attitudes all feel like me; and because they shape my awareness, capture my attention and enlist my intentions to follow or fight them, there’s a relative truth in that. However you can come out of that ‘me’ and ‘mine’. When you walk, and you feel your body moving and opening and easing, that rhythm and supple flow can break through the holding on, tension and agitation of personal history. You don’t need an identity, a past or a future, to walk.

So you learn to refer, not to your attitudes and wishes, but to embodied awareness. Who, or better, how, is that? Is it supple and open? Observe how the sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ is accompanied by contraction of awareness, a fixation of attention and agitated intentions. Then, go fully into the body, and steadying through that, acknowledge that awareness can open and: ‘I can be aware of my agitation and resistance, even listen to it and study it ... so, although it may be happening to me, it can’t be me.’

Whenever we accomplish that shift, we bring awareness into the mind. In other words, we’re not denying or affirming any point of view, just noting it in a way that is aligned to receptivity rather than any preceding view or expectation. This discernment, the knowing that embodiment has brought to the fore, isn’t me or created by me, it’s steady and free from bias. Ongoing practice is then about bringing one’s personal disposition, reactions and what they rest on into this light. And as discernment reviews the historical self with its memories and attitudes, it can inquire: ‘How useful is this? Where does this take me?’ In this inquiry, the rule is: if you don’t need it, if it doesn’t make a useful contribution, withdraw energy and attention from it. Run this line of inquiry over the need to narrate, justify, prove, improve, and criticize – and even the urge to map what stage you’re at. What you’re left with is increasingly steady ground.

This open territory is not measured in worldly terms of getting ahead, or holding on – and certainly isn’t arrived at through cutting corners. In fact the aim is to get to the end of the world with its measures of gain and loss, success and failure. Pause when any of these start to form; return to the present when you feel a map unfold or a destination arise – and investigate these dispositions with the aim of understanding their effect. Certainly intention is useful; we wish to change for the better. But open the attitude. Maybe the change for the better would be to relax into embodiment, to take the pressure off your ‘doing’ energy, and cultivate the receptive. Energy and motivation are still there, but instead of darting forward like an arrow, that shift of intention opens your awareness into a circle that covers what arises – and that changes your inner shape. This felt abiding place gets broader, and you can see things more clearly. You walk out of history and become conscious that deep change is possible. In fact, in the natural state, it’s inevitable.

This open territory has no maps, and is not moved out of. And it doesn’t need some self to own it.

FOOTPRINTS

1 STABLE INNER GROUND IS FOUND BY WALKING AS IF THE EXTERNAL GROUND IS RECEPTIVE AND SUPPORTIVE (YOU MAY NOT HAVE REALIZED IT, BUT IT IS). THE INTENTION IS TO BE RECEPTIVE TO HOW IT CARRIES YOUR WEIGHT AND ACTS AS THE SPRINGBOARD FOR YOUR MOVEMENT.

2 BEARING IN MIND THAT THE MOVEMENT OF WALKING BEGINS IN THE LOWER BACK, ADJUST YOUR PERCEPTION OF WALKING TO SUIT. YOUR BACK IS THE DRIVER; YOUR FRONT IS QUIET, OPEN

AND RECEPTIVE. YOU’RE NOT WALKING TOWARDS A POINT, YOU’RE WALKING AWAY FROM A RESIDUE. THE SPACE IMMEDIATELY IN FRONT OF YOU IS ALWAYS OPENING.

3 LET AWARENESS SPREAD WIDTHWAYS, ACROSS YOUR SHOULDERS AND HIPS AS YOU WALK. THERE’S NO CHANGE IN TERMS OF MOVEMENT, JUST AN ENCOURAGEMENT FOR AWARENESS TO FULLY FILL THE FORM – AND EXTEND BEYOND INTO THE SPACE AROUND YOU.

4 THE SIGNS OF AN ACQUIRED PROGRAM OR UNDERLYING TENDENCY ARE: A) YOUR AWARENESS NUMBS OUT FOR A MOMENT OR TWO; B) YOUR MIND SUDDENLY LEAPS AND GETS ACTIVE – YOU THINK OF ALL KINDS OF THINGS TO DO; C) YOU EXPERIENCE A CONSTRICTION IN YOUR INTERNAL BODY; D) POWERFUL EMOTIONS SUDDENLY FLOOD YOUR HEART, OFTEN ACCOMPANIED BY HIGH-SPEED THINKING AND NARRATIVES. WHEN ANY OF THESE OCCUR, AND YOU BRING AWARENESS TO THEM, THERE MAY BE DISORIENTATION – YOU FEEL UNBALANCED. FIND YOUR BODY, EXTERNALLY AND INTERNALLY, WIDEN YOUR AWARENESS OVER ALL THAT AND STEADY THE HEART. WHEN THERE IS A PAUSE IN THE FLOOD, MOVE INTO THAT. YOU DON’T NEED TO EXPLAIN ANYTHING RIGHT NOW. JUST LET YOUR AWARENESS ADJUST TO THE OPEN STATE.