SIDETRACK

LEE MAKES SOME SPACE

Lee opened the door of his tiny apartment and stood looking at the scene. Three chairs and a couch wouldn’t have seemed like much in one of those apartments that you see in brochures, but ... there was the heap of magazines sprawled at odd angles over the bedside table; the notes and stickers on the fridge door, the dead plant on top of the fridge ... and the TV screen, sitting in front of the couch, presiding over it and waiting for him to slump down, pick up the console and be flooded .... The sheer mindless habit of it all suddenly struck him. News, then a comedy show to get over the news, then having dragged a TV dinner out of the microwave, a movie to accompany spaghetti, fries and ... well, at least he’d cut out the red wine.

That move was a result of a recent change of routine. He’d decided to get off the metro a stop earlier than the nearby station and walk the rest of the way home. It took an extra twenty minutes, the neighbourhood was nothing special, but it felt good to not be rushing through it. ...Sometimes there was a cheerful exchange with a woman who walked her dog at this time, but the benefit was mostly that of returning to his body – or rather entering it – after a day of phone and screens, high-speed work details and snatchy conversations that made up his working life. He had a mindfulness app that encouraged walking, feeling the sensations in the feet and body and relaxing the hands and belly. It was a gentle surprise to experience the body like it was some calm creature that he could get to know and feel strangely comforted by. It was a simple comfort, but it introduced him to a way of being that made the blurred state that half a bottle of wine would bring on seem unattractive, even gross.

Yes, the clarity that twenty minutes of no-hurry walking brought around – it felt clean and made him feel more intact, more present, more truly himself.

He looked at his life spread out in the single-roomed apartment. A mess. ‘The couch,’ he thought, ‘– get on that and I’m lost.’ He scanned the room: ‘Move that chair, slide the bookshelf and table back, stack that chair on the other, shove the couch into the corner ...’ There was now a clear path beside the window; it looked like he could take about seven steps and then turn a right angle to add a few more. So he pulled off his shoes, wriggled his toes alive, relaxed his shoulders and stood for a while before picking up a ‘strolling in the park’ kind of gait. He found that if he gave fuller attention to the flow of the walking, it softened the fenced-in impression of being in the room. He walked to and fro three, four, five times, pausing at the end of the path and resting his weight and tension down through his feet ... then relaxing the compulsion to sink into a glowing screen. ... After seven of these, he sat down on the chair and looked around: ‘Get rid of the old magazines, say goodbye to the plant. I don’t actually need that big a bookcase, a shelf will do.’ Then he gave the TV a thoughtful stare – and threw a blanket over it. At least for an hour... He’d get some fresh food, cook a meal and just enjoy that. Maybe phone Kai after that, have a chat.

And once the bookcase was gone, there was an interesting corner that with a bit of tidying, looked like a good place to try some of that sitting meditation that the app took you through.