THE HUSH
AT THE 
END OF THE
WORLD
A 
Pilgrimage 
to the 
Arctic 
Wilderness
Amaro Bhikkhu
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   1 16/03/2013   13:50:07

The main thing to remember 
about the purpose of this journey 
is the silence –
it’s about going into the silence.
Luang Por Sumedho
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   2 16/03/2013   13:50:12

iii
CONTENTS
Preface
1. Before the Beginning
2. Setting Forth
3. Light and Falling Water
4. The Island
5. Reindalen
6. Finnesaksla
7. Lynndalen and the Fox
8. Petchabuhn
9. Back to the Ship
10. Endless Sunset
11. The Clamour of Spring 
12. Return to the Deathless Realm 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   3 16/03/2013   13:50:12

The world is round;
your destination is unmissable.
Welcome aboard.
Inscription beside the door of the SAS plane, 
between Copenhagen and Bergen.  
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   4 16/03/2013   13:50:18

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   5 16/03/2013   13:50:26

vi
Memory is a tricky business.
As Kurosawa’s film ‘Rashomon’ showed so effectively, people 
can have quite different recollections of exactly the same event.
What brought this to mind is the conflict between my memory 
and the entries in my journal as to how, in May of 2003, three 
senior Buddhist monks from the Thai forest tradition of Ajahn 
Chah came to travel into the Arctic wilderness, 800 or so miles 
from the North Pole.
On the one hand, my memory around the events that were the 
genesis of the journey is clear. On the other hand, the entries in 
my journal – written at the end of each day but not revisited in a 
decade – say “Wait a minute. That’s not exactly how it happened.”
For example, my memory was quite clear that the idea for 
the journey into the Arctic arose while having tea with Luang 
Por Sumedho and Ajahn Amaro in a specific place, on a specific 
afternoon. However, my journal says, “Not so.” The differences 
between these and other small details were sharp and vivid 
reminders that the past is all-too-easily misremembered.
Where there is agreement between memory and journal is 
that the idea for the journey began during a ten-day meditation 
retreat taught by Luang Por Sumedho and Ajahn Amaro at Spirit 
Rock in northern California in April of 2001.
One evening during the retreat, Luang Por Sumedho talked 
about a powerful vision he had experienced while meditating. It 
was of sitting, quite alone, in a white, freezing void; a colourless, 
featureless wilderness where the howling of unseen wolves 
broke the otherwise all-encompassing silence. But, in spite of the 
harshness of the environment, Luang Por Sumedho’s feeling was 
one of complete and utter peace.
This nimitta arose not long after Luang Por Sumedho had left 
the forest monasteries of north-east Thailand and was living 
PREFACE
by Richard Smith
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   6 16/03/2013   13:50:29

vii
Over the course of the next two years, the journey slowly took 
shape. An extremely patient and very helpful travel agent was 
eventually found. (Unsurprisingly, most travel agents have no 
experience of organizing a journey into the Arctic wilderness for a 
small group of monastic and lay meditators.)
Svalbard, the base camp for the first successful expedition to 
the North Pole and for most North Pole expeditions since, was 
chosen as our destination – not least because we could make 
the journey partly by ship; not least because there was a hotel 
at Longyearbyen, the largest settlement on Svalbard; not least 
because there was a guiding service in Longyearbyen that could 
accommodate our slightly unusual group; not least because there 
was some assurance that the daily meal offering could be found 
without too much difficulty (or anxiety on my part).
As plans coalesced, our group of three expanded to six. Ajahn 
Nyanarato, a much-loved senior monk at Amaravati, joined 
on the monastic side. T wo old friends, Sandra Berman and 
Martin Piszczalski, both long-term practitioners from Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, joined on the lay side. Numerous, lengthy and detailed 
e-mail communications went back and forth on the amount, 
kind and sizing of the clothing and footwear that would be 
necessary. Flights, cabins, hotel rooms and guiding services were 
booked and confirmed.
Some two years after the idea for the journey emerged, we were 
– at long last – ready.
As we were waiting to take-off at Heathrow airport on the first 
leg of our journey, a red fox appeared and trotted on the grass 
alongside the runway as our plane began to move and gather 
speed.
“ An auspicious start,” said Luang Por Sumedho.
And indeed it was.
in England, in London, in the cramped and noisy Hampstead 
Vihara. It was a very powerful insight as to how ‘perfect’ external 
conditions are not necessary for the mind of non-attachment 
(cittaviveka) to arise.
As Ajahn Amaro put it in his book ‘Inner Listening’: “Being 
newly arrived in a foreign and distinctly non-Buddhist country, 
and being in a small house in a big and noisy city, he found a 
strong urge to retreat and get away, back to his beloved forests 
in Thailand and away from all these crowds of ‘pesky, pestering’ 
people. But a vividly clear insight eventually dawned that, rather 
than seeking the physical seclusion of ka–yaviveka, he needed to 
develop the inner seclusion of cittaviveka… This insight proved 
so central to his understanding of how best to work in this 
new environment that, when they did eventually move out of 
London, having been given a forest in West Sussex, he named the 
new monastery ‘Cittaviveka.’”
On the last day of the Spirit Rock retreat, while taking my 
leave of Luang Por Sumedho and Ajahn Amaro, the topic of Luang 
Por’s vision arose again, with Ajahn Amaro mentioning that he 
had experienced something similar – not while meditating but 
in a dream. Again, it was the feeling of being in a cold, white, 
featureless void, although not in the harsh conditions of Luang 
Por Sumedho’s nimitta.
Someone, perhaps me, said that it sounded like the Arctic and 
a voice that I faintly recognized as my own said, “Perhaps we 
could go?”
On this point, my journal and my memory agree: both Luang 
Por Sumedho and Ajahn Amaro found the idea of a journey into 
the Arctic wilderness to be of more than passing interest. As my 
journal entry for that day notes, “I think both Luang Por and 
Ajahn Amaro would like to go.”
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   7 16/03/2013   13:50:29

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   8 16/03/2013   13:50:37

1
BEFORE THE BEGINNING
[Early May ~ Amaravati]
By yesterday afternoon all of the party for the northern 
adventure had gathered at Amaravati. All barring Sandra 
Berman, sadly, whose 95 year-old mother was ailing and 
very close to the end, causing Sandra to stay with her 
as long as possible and aim to be joining us in Bergen. 
Richard brought with him a multitude of cold weather 
accoutrements, mostly for Luang Por and Ajahn Nyanarato; 
most of my gear has come on loan from the Abhayagiri 
Canadians, including the parka owned by Ajahn Pasanno’s 
late father – it is more than 20 years old but is still in prime 
condition, even the wolf-tail lining the hood is still full and 
bushy.
Somehow the prospect of the journey still inhabits the 
surreal realms of the possible – despite all of the equipment 
I
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   1 16/03/2013   13:50:44

and the fast-approaching launch-date of the escapade. The 
glorious spring sunshine of a rich May day in southern 
England, with bluebells carpetting the woodlands and 
dressing the hedge-banks in their delicate veils of violetevening hue, pushes the concept of the arctic wilderness far 
into another realm. Equally, having spent the middle part 
of the day in the company of Radhika and Vish Kidao in 
Berkhamsted, drinking in their fond hospitality as well as 
their abundant Indian cuisine, exploring endless avenues 
of spiritual life from Wei Wu Wei and Ramesh Balsekar to 
the ancient stupas of India – the vast white wastelands and 
harsh winds of Svalbard, let alone the steep and foam-lashed 
fjords of the North Atlantic, might as well be on Mars.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   2 16/03/2013   13:50:54

T omorrow the journey proper begins: is it into the maw of 
the north, the abode of winter death and the threat of Viking 
rampage? Or into the eternal light – the never-setting sun of 
Dhamma-dı-pa? Maybe the two elements always interplay and 
the journey will carry us into the source of both.

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   3 16/03/2013   13:51:11

4
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   4 16/03/2013   13:51:13

5
SETTING FORTH
[May 14th ~ Bergen & Polarlys]
The long slow dawn began many hours ago, if indeed the dusk ever ended. It is 4 a.m. and 
the Polarys, our floating stately home for these few days, glides in effortless lines under the 
constantly dripping leaden skies and between an unending array of islets, headlands and 
stream-striped crags. The group of us who have gathered on the ship parted company at 
10:30 last night, just after the long-lingering blood-orange sun had finally submerged itself 
from view. The remains of the night passed slowly – perhaps because of the endless light, 
perhaps the gentle thrumming of the ship (despite there being scarcely a rocking motion of 
any kind) or perhaps because the energy of our adventure had simply rendered the realm 
of sleep superfluous. We slide. The drip-etched windows of the prow break up the sparkles 
from ruby beacons flashing on the promontories and turning points of the craggy land 
around us; occasional house-lights in clustered settlements form gentle glows and hints of 
warmth in layered curtains of grey and dim dark green. A slender road-bridge arcs above us 
as the channel cuts through a minute strait, a green beacon only yards away to starboard, 
perched on a finger of stone. The motion ceases and the ship nudges its way toward another 
local port – Måløy.
II
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   5 16/03/2013   13:51:15

Just over a day ago we had all 
gathered at the cloister gate of 
Amaravati. It was 6:15 a.m. and a 
bright sun-dog – auspicious fivecoloured cloud – was shining at the 
lower edge of a cloud-bank to the left 
of its early-rising master. 
As the rest of the travellers and 
well-wishers appeared the “dog” 
faded, and, after the obligatory 
farewells and team photo, we loaded 
the van with the bulging burritos 
of our arctic gear and hit the road. 
Sandra, the sixth member of the 
crew, had been late to join us, having 
had to be in close attendance to her 
mother in San Diego. Like my own, 
she had recently had some serious 
illness and, until a few days ago, had 
been close to the brink. Somehow 
she had rallied well and, coming off 
her I.V . had allowed Sandra’s heart 
to be at ease with making the trip as 
planned.
The first hop brought us to 
Copenhagen; we transferred there to 
a sturdy prop plane to make the last 
leg to Bergen. Beside the door at the 
top of the gangway, neatly painted 
on the hull, were the words, “The 
world is round, your destination is 
unmissable, welcome on board” – 
wonderfully observant, philosophical, 
and strangely comforting. The 
Norwegian coast comes into view 
below and around us, as we descend 
through the all-encompassing cloud: 

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   6 16/03/2013   13:51:20

for a moment we view from above 
the contours and character of this 
coast of 10,000 islands and rocky 
digits – snow-capped peaks form a 
grey-white saw’s edge to the south 
and west. 
Bergen seems to be blessed with 
helpful taxi drivers – when the 
chauffeur of the van bringing us 
from the airport to the town finally 
overcame his shyness to ask if we 
were Buddhists, he said, “You are the 
first Buddhists I have ever met,” and 
switched off his meter and proceeded 
to give us an impromptu guided tour 
of the ancient town. 
Once our bags were dropped at 
the dock we returned to the old 
part of town and wandered through 
wooden-decked and cobbled lanes, 
and beneath the precious ramshackle 
of the Bryggen buildings. All the 
uprights and right-angles had long 
since been bent out of true by the 
forces of wind and water, movements 
of the earth and fire, so it all hung 
together in a chaotic jig-saw puzzle of 
overhangs, angles and rooflines.
Sauntering, lingering until the 
launch-time called us back – gently 
the prosperity and cosmopolitania, 
bestowed by the flow of North Sea 
oil, conveyed the character of this 
revived country to us. Norway is now 
(reputedly) the sixth most prosperous 
nation on earth and this is easy to 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   7 16/03/2013   13:51:23

8
believe. It even wears its new-found wealth with 
an air of comfortable sophistication – if you 
pointed out to them that naming a supermarket 
“Norsea Foods” was likely to have an off-putting 
effect on visiting English speakers, you felt that 
the comment would merely be brushed aside as 
the kind of bathroom humour to be expected of 
vulgar foreigners.
By the time Luang Por, Ajahn Nyanarato and 
I had explored a few of the palatial lounges and 
the upper decks the ship was ready to depart and, 
as Richard and Sandra appeared from a doorway 
to join us on the top deck below the funnel, the 
blast of the whistle-horn rang out (at 8:00 p.m. 
on the button) and the anchors were weighed.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   8 16/03/2013   13:51:28

9
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   9 16/03/2013   13:51:36

10
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   10 16/03/2013   13:51:41

11
III
LIGHT AND FALLING WATER
[May 15th ~ Polarlys]
The day took us through endless straits between headlands, islands, rocky knolls crowned 
with a single spare bush or a stoic huddle of trees. The first stop, at 8:45 a.m., was Ålesund – 
a grey mass of folds and tones filled the sky and poured steadily into the land and sea below. 
Bracketed by a tall hill at the north end of the port and a honey-coloured onion-domed 
church at the south, the town, a cluster of vari-coloured wooden houses, sat comfortably 
in between. We disembarked out of the cocoon of the ship long enough to be blasted by the 
billowing sheets of rain, snap a picture and then retreat from the wet and the grey again – 
the image of Refuge becomes very clear in such an environment.
From Ålesund we cut inland down a collection of looming fjords, the ship (some 
350’ long and with an 80’ beam) twisting and turning like a London taxi, following the 
knowledge through a maze of tiny forking streets. The shores drew closer, the slopes 
steeper as the vessel ploughed unerringly on – the ship’s on-board guide made regular 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   11 16/03/2013   13:51:42

announcements, such as: “ Attention 
please! We are now entering the 18km long 
Strandafjord; on your left, about 1800m 
up on the shelf is the farm of ancient 
local inhabitants…” The wonderfully 
clipped Norwegian accent and flat delivery 
told us (with the same emotional tone 
and lilt) that Farmer A had grown 100 
kg. of apricots whereas Ms. B. had been 
decapitated for having two illegitimate 
children “… and her head was put on a 
stake, to be an example to others…” – such 
gems embroidered the background of the 
whole morning.
Streams cascaded down on either side 
and snowy ridges crept closer and closer 
to the water’s edge. By midday we had 
docked at Geiranger, many miles into the 
interior of the country and had disgorged 
the majority of the passengers for a day 
tour of the local country. We almost had 
the dining room to ourselves and lingered 
for hours over postprandial coffees and 
Dhamma dialogues.
The return from Geiranger was 
uncommented upon and, before we knew 
it, the hours had folded themselves away 
and we had retraced our path to Ålesund. 
All the way along, the sight of smallholdings and humble houses tucked at the 
feet of cliffs, wedged into the corners or 
on benches above the fjord, resonated the 
power of human resolve and grit in the 
face of grim and fearsome forces: “ And here 
she had 14 children and took each one 
for baptising in the boat to Geiranger…” 
“There are 42 turns in the path up from 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   12 16/03/2013   13:51:46

the fjord to the farm…” – life on the very edge: what strength we are capable of when we 
put our hearts to the task.
We gathered up in the top, sheltered panorama lounge as the hours turned towards 
evening. The light dims so slowly – Luang Por left at 9:15 when it was still broad day, 
the rest of us lingered together a little longer, “under the heaventree of stars hung with 
humid nightblue fruit” that winked and sparkled with gathering strength across the 
ceiling of the lounge, as the clashing grey of the skies, the looming land and the rippling 
steel of the North Sea all slowly disappeared into each other.
Now on deck, ripped into by the teeth of the vicious wind – needles of rain piercing 
the few patches of face unprotected by hood and balaclava; round a corner, a soft lulling 
breeze, a few drips from the deck above; another corner and the tumbling airs pull and 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   13 16/03/2013   13:51:50

14
tug my poncho this way and that – each 
deck and nook of the boat has its unique 
micro-climate.
The rare sorties out into the reaches of 
the North Sea unfenced by island barriers 
stir the water’s surface and the gliding 
palace once more becomes a floating 
chamber held up only by the grace of the 
sea, pitching and gently rolling us like a 
great hand rubbing the fur of a cat’s belly. 
Now this way, now that, we purr at the 
tender massage from below. Soon though, 
the stroking ends and we resume the icesmooth glide, ever ahead.
The would-be epic character of our 
journey to the wild north is muted 
somewhat by the cardigan-and-slipper/
rotarian character of our fellow way-farers; 
it is hard to get the into-the-frozenwastelands mood well established when 
the abiding perception is that of a weekend 
in Cheltenham or at a spa in Baden Baden. 
[May 16th ~ Polarlys]
It is a clear bright morning. The air is as still as in a vast closed hall – clouds 
hang on the mountain peaks without moving an inch as we glide past; the 
sea is an undulating mirror.
Yesterday’s long breakfast under threatening skies brought in a few 
squalls but all rain had cleared by the time we docked at Trondheim. We 
even cheered in surprise at the appearance of a flash or two of blue in 
between the threads the horizon-wide carpet of mottled greys.
The city is a former capital of Norway (in the middle ages) and bears the 
grave of St. Olav, known as the “Eternal King of Norway” and patron saint of 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   14 16/03/2013   13:51:55

15
the country. We journeyed into town and 
made our way to the old cathedral, spending 
an hour or so in the tall dark embrace of its 
chamber. The rose window at the rear was 
rich in flaming electric blues and bloodruby reds, Sandra (who had never been in a 
European cathedral before) remarked that it 
seemed as though that mandala should be 
the spiritual centerpiece of the place, rather 
than the smallish dim crucifix and the slain 
Christ down at the opposite end. It was a 
peaceful but gloomy chamber – well suited 
to the lowering sombre character of the 
weather we had seen and matching the dark, 
dour mood of Bergman films and the endless 
night of winter. We wondered what it must 
take to be a stonemason in Trondheim, 
what callouses and pachydermal layers that 
would add to your hands. Slender pillars 
rose into the shadows of the dark timber and 
stone ceiling, where rings of hanging lights 
attempted to alleviate the dimness, like 
threads of effort and intention reaching into 
the living darkness of the rock and coaxing a 
sanctuary and shrine forth from
 it.
As we sat in the shelter of a café in the 
upper reaches of a shopping mall, crafted 
out of the shells of old brick warehouse 
structures, the sky cleared more and more 
and, by the time the ship was underway 
again, bright sun sparkled the waters for 
the first time.
The greens of the meadows shone as we 
passed by; in the new leaves of the tiny 
patches of woodland, light rose with a 
vigour we had assumed we would not see 
– the previous days having hung so leaden 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   15 16/03/2013   13:52:00

16
and heavy. The bright yellows, rusty reds 
and navy blues of local houses, clinging 
as they do to the shoreline of the land, 
glowed also with a surprising brightness. 
More folks were out on the decks, 
snapping pictures, enjoying the air and the 
endless parade of the dazzling view.
It being the full moon day of May we 
celebrated Visakha Puja, commemorating 
the birth, enlightenment and final passing 
away of the Buddha. For this we had 
rented a conference room and at 7:00 
p.m. Richard and Sandra set it up with 
a small shrine, having brought all the 
accoutrements along particularly for this 
occasion. Luang Por, Ajahn Nyanarato 
and I had our “uposatha for bhikkhus” – 
probably the first on a ship off the coast 
of Norway, although Buddhist pilgrims (Fa 
Hien, Hsuan Tsang and the like) must have 
often needed to carry out the Observance 
like this when on board ship between 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   16 16/03/2013   13:52:04

17
India, China, and the South-East Asian 
islands.
We were joined by our three lay 
companions at 7:30, did the evening 
puja and a large collection of parittas: to 
celebrate Vaisakh, our collective endeavour, 
and to dedicate the recitation to the ailing 
mothers of myself and Sandra. After the 
chanting we meditated for an hour, gently 
rocked by the ship as it was carried by 
mother ocean, also serenaded by golden 
oldies emanating from the bar beyond the 
thick brass-studded doors: Petula Clark, 
Manfred Mann, the Kinks and numerous 
other anthems of the Boomers.
Luang Por was persuaded to offer some 
Dhamma reflections and spoke of the 
inspiration for this journey – “The only 
purpose is to enter into the infinite, the 
silence and space: ordinary measures 
do not apply here – in-finite/imThe Hush - final CMYK.indd   17 16/03/2013   13:52:09

measureable…”  – dusk at midnight in the 
mythical Land of Grey and Pink. 
Seas of glass and soft colour: a most 
mysterious and wonder-filled Visakha 
Puja – never dark, therefore no dawn, an 
all-night sitting without the night.
The barren rocky shoulders of the 
shoreline and inland mountains that we 
can see, resonate the entry into simplicity 
and utter openness.
Luang Por’s formal offering was drawn 
to a close during one of his pauses, by the 
intervention of our ubiquitous announcer 
reminding us of the opportunity to make 
some “namecard of your nationality” for 
the National Day procession on the 18th 
in Tromsø. At that point Luang Por’s flow 
changed character somewhat and melded 
into a Dhamma dialogue between us all. 
      
The main point that it all revolved 
around (no pun intended) was his insight 
into “The point which excludes and the 
point which includes” and how the former could not possibly constitute Samma  –-
sama  –dhi.
Another of the main areas of our dialogue, and that which chiefly symbolized our 
current journey to the north, was that of merging with the infinite. As the realm of 
fertility and diversity is left behind we are surrounded by banks of bare stone, barren 
mountains clad more and more by ice and snow rather than sheltering forests and 
their winged and scurrying creatures. Silence, space, emptiness, simplicity – the 
harshness of the deep north with its attendant awesome peace, like the effortless 
sheltered glide that our ship effects so serenely through this land of rock and frost – 
these are the qualities of the pure heart.
      
For Sandra and I it also brought to mind the journey that our mothers are 

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   18 16/03/2013   13:52:12

currently making – from the familiar 
confines of the human world, via the 
harshness of ageing and sickness, into the 
great unknown. With Right View it has 
that effortlessness and peace; without it, 
it’s another story.
As if to underscore this principle, as the 
discussion reaches a natural pause, we 
climb up from the floor, settle ourselves in 
chairs by the windows and watch together 
our last sunset for the next ten days. 
Visakha Puja at the Arctic Circle: the entry 
into the infinite and the immeasurable 
does not just mean extra distances, longer 
than our current ruler, it means that 
“distances” and other familiar forms of 
measure no longer apply here: if there is no 
night, when is dawn? If no dawn, when is 
it OK to breakfast? Midnight? What about 
“not being separated from our robes at 
dawn”?…?  Familiar and reliable means of 
judgment do not pertain in this zone. “The 
T athagata is profound, deep, immeasurable, 
not capable of being reckoned in any way.” 
“Upasiva, one who has reached the End 
has no criterion by which they can be 
measured – that by which they could be 
talked of is no more… When all modes of 
being, all phenomena are removed, then all 
means of description have gone too.”
 
An all-night sitting with no night – we 
sat and gazed, drank in the rippling realm 
of grey, dove-blue and pink as the hours 
passed. Moving in a mythic landscape: 
water but not water, night but not night, 
meditating but not meditating, going 
somewhere but being still.

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   19 16/03/2013   13:52:16

20
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   20 16/03/2013   13:52:18

21
[May 17th ~ Polarlys]
After laying down the body for the rest of 
the so-called night, I woke before six to 
bright day, a cloudless sky and immediately 
wanted to start snapping pictures. All 
morning the ship had scarcely rocked and 
the air had rested still as a blanket on a 
sleeping child. Now out of Ørnes and well 
on our way to Bodø some clouds have 
begun to deck more and more of the sky. 
Snow wraps the great majority of peaks on 
the eastern shore and deeper inland the 
slopes seem bare of trees. Here and there 
the flatter stretches of mountain lie under 
dense, bright and gently curving snow 
fields. It was at 7:20:38  that we crossed the 
Artic Circle (at 66.5°N) this morning and 
were welcomed officially into North Norway 
– pictures galore recorded the grand event.
                                                  
After an earlier lunch than usual we 
pulled into Bodø and took the opportunity 
for a walk around the town to stretch 
the legs. The town had been completely 
flattened by German bombing, in the 
space of two hours, during the Second 
World War, so the character of the place 
was very different from Bergen and 
Trondheim, whose ancient quarters still 
held an aura of wizened settledness. Bodø 
had a brasher face, and that rough and 
new hewn persona peculiar to towns of 
concrete and steel.
It is a small place and, after strolling the 
length of a couple of the central streets, we 
looped back down along one comprising 
the main shopping precinct. As we passed 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   21 16/03/2013   13:52:23

through the now-familiar, glassed-in 
shopping mall area – here aptly dubbed 
“The Glass House” – a youngish croppedhaired man approached us: “Excuse me, 
are you Buddhists? Where are you from?” 
“I was born in England but our main 
monastery is in Thailand.” “Do you know 
Wat Pah Nanachat?” “This monk is the one 
who founded it – Ajahn Sumedho.”
The amazed fellow’s face was a picture 
of open-mouthed wonder – he had been 
there, at Wat Pah Nanachat, only a few 
weeks before. He was just returning to 
Tromsø, from his ninth trip to Thailand, 
and was traveling on the Polarlys along 
with us.
“When you travel by train or plane 
through Norway, you leave your soul 
behind you; when you travel by the 
coastal streamer, your soul goes with you.”  
Norwegian proverb (via Stig in Bodø).
The remainder of the day unfolded, 
continuingly bright: we sat chatting and 
exchanging news and views at the Hobbit 
Café with our new friend Stig; the skies 
went from clearish to cloudless as the boat 
and hours progressed; the light was still 
strong on the racks of drying cod at the 
mouth of Svolvær harbour, far into the 
evening. 
      
The whole population on board 
abandoned the idea of an early night 
on account of the promise of a passage 
through the 100 metre-wide Trollfjord 
under bright skies at 11:30 p.m., coupled 

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   22 16/03/2013   13:52:26

with the legal drinking on the eve of the 
public holiday (no spirits on National 
Day).
We inched into this narrowest of 
channels beneath the rosy-edged canopy 
of evening, the great ship glid the length 
of the yawning trough, its northern wall 
reaching 1000m above us, its southern 
slightly less. Sliding to a graceful halt at 
the butt end of the fjord, our trusty bark 
rotated neatly on its own axis, with only 
a few yards to spare at either end, redirected itself north-eastwards and slid 
effortlessly out of the abyss once again.
After sharing “Trollfjord tea” along with 
everybody else we, having had the frontcentre seats claimed for us by Luang Por 
while the rest of the world was at supper, 
sat on, delighting in the lights upon the 
water, and in each other’s company, until 
the panorama hall was empty but for us 
and one or two others, and we pulled 
into Stokmarknes at 1:00 a.m. It was still 
plenty bright enough for an old fellow to 
be sat in his chair, reading a newspaper by 
the light coming through the window – 
time seems more and more of an arbitrary 
concept as the journey and the so-called 
days progress. 
[May 18th ~ Polarlys & Tromsø] 
The remainder of the events of Norwegian 
National Day (celebrating independence 
from Sweden, in 1905) unfurled like a 
handful of colourful ribbons in the wind, 
like the strings of pennants that the crew 
had been tying early that morning from 
the prow of the ship to above the bridge 
and all along to the stern. The wind ripped 
and tugged at them then left them to gently drift this way and that like the mind’s 
moods shifting and changing in the breezes of circumstance.
There had been a little cloud earlier, 
allowing the sun to break through onto 
the vast stretches of open water in bright 
islands of light, sending their glittering 
pathways out to each watching eye, as if in 
personal greeting to every one of us.
We pulled into Harstad at around 6:45 
a.m., and were greeted by the music of 
a marching band, waiting for us on the 
quay. The unfolding of the day continued 
with the Captain’s speech and the national 
anthem at breakfast and then, around 
10:45, Luang Por and myself and most of 
our fellow passengers crowded onto the 
Panorama deck lounge for the Arctic Circle 
ceremony. 

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   23 16/03/2013   13:52:29

24
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   24 16/03/2013   13:52:32

25
Just as crossing the Equator on a ship has long involved a ritual of passage, 
requesting the blessing of King Neptune, a matching rite also happened here. 
His Oceanic Majesty appeared, preceeded by the blasts of a small foghorn, in 
bulky sea-weed coloured robes, awesome-grim white face mask and bearing 
an impressively threatening trident. He and the Captain took centre stage, 
behind a low table equipped with two ice buckets and ladles and then (with 
the three best guessers of the exact crossing time going first) all those who 
wished for a certificate of Arctic crossing – or who just wanted to request 
His Fierce and Watery Majesty’s permission to wander in his realm – came 
forward for the “communion with the cod and halibut and other fishes” 
ceremony. 
Just like the attendees at a retreat, or at a wedding blessing, coming forward 
one by one for sacred threads to be tied on their wrists, the passengers 
stepped up and the ritual masters (H.M. and the Captain) took ladle in hand, 
the supplicant knelt before them and icy water was poured down their 
necks. A great number of our fellow voyagers stepped up for this and cameras 
flashed like the sun sparkling on the water. Luang Por and I declined the 
option as did all our lay companions, but our friend Stig was the very last of 
all those calling for permission to enter the realm of Neptune.
 
      
By the time we reached Finnsnes the marching band theme had expanded 
and a parade of the townspeople with banners hooters and streamers filled 
the street leading to the dock. A double line of high-school students – all 
clad in their red dungarees with decals and dangling strapped uniforms 
– formed either side of the gang-plank to welcome passengers off and to 
invite them to join the parade around town. Martin and Sandra joined the 
throng, she enjoying her first parade with great delight, only to remember 
that the schedule said departure of ship 10:30, her watch said 10:28, so she 
and Martin raced back to discover the ship happily still settled at the dock. 
She had noticed that half the other passengers were still cheerfully carrying 
on in the parade but only when they had returned did they discover that 
departure was 10:45 – hi ho.
The pattern was redoubled when we reached Tromsø: the quay was thick 
with well-wishers and townspeople who, as soon as the doors were open, 
streamed up the gangplank – decked in national costume like a 1000 Snow 
Whites, Gretels and Hansels, carrying balloons. As they rose to the head 
of the stairs, only to see Ajahn Nyanarato and I in the lobby, we saw the 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   25 16/03/2013   13:52:36

26
progression of 1) distracted excitement 2) 
a startled puzzledness as each noticed us, 
wondered what we were, and calculated 
whether we were in costume or not for 
the day, and 3) cracking broad smiles.  
We enjoyed each other’s presence in the 
chance encounter and delighted in the 
strange beauty of our respective outfits. 
Hundreds and hundreds poured onto 
the boat, young and old alike, and then 
simply poured off again. By the time an 
hour had passed the six of us had managed 
to gather in the lobby with our bulky bags 
of arctic gear and there was lull enough 
to allow us to disembark. Our hotel was 
within a few hundred yards of the dock 
and, before we knew it, we had arrived and 
settled in our rooms, although the sound of 
moving water outside my window, coupled 
with a few days of sleep deprivation, kept 
hinting to my body that we were still at 
sea. A gentle, almost comforting swaying 
sensation was sent up from my knees from 
time to time as I pottered around the room 
and organized my things.
      
Once we had stowed all our bags and 
made ourselves at home we re-convened 
and took off for a wander around the 
town. The carnival atmosphere was still 
permeating the streets, although there 
was more of an after-the-party feel to it by 
then: Hansels and Gretels still thronged 
the streets (some on mobile phones, some 
eating candy floss) along with their Gothic 
counterparts in deep eye-shadow and 
blacks, and a sprinkling of hard-looking, 
short-haired men in leather jackets and 
dark glasses – the Russian immigrant 
contingent? – or maybe the husbands of the 
1,000 Snow Whites, who were NOT going 
to dress up in white socks and buttoned 
knee-britches for any goddamn holiday.
We made our way to the newly opened 
Thai restaurant – kitted out with interior 
design of corrugated tin roofs, kerosene 
lanterns and other insignia of rural Esan 
life, we even drank cups of matoum (baelfruit tea) for the long while that we sat 
there. The rest of the meander brought 
a random local up to Ajahn Nyanarato, 
asking if the monk could give him some 
wisdom, took us past a small Shiva lingam 
statue and also by the Little Buddha 
Restaurant, where well-lubricated, openmouthed diners gawked in surprise as 
Luang Por and the rest of us trouped by in 
robes, like those of the restaurant’s logo.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   26 16/03/2013   13:52:38

27
THE ISLAND
[May 19th ~ Tromsø & Svalbard]
There was even less of anything resembling night, as the light shifted tones on the placid 
waters of the sound and dressed the ultramodern church on the farther shore in different 
pale and golden hues. The flight was due to take off in late morning and, in these remote 
climes there was little time needed to make the drive to the airport, and no long waits 
necessitated by security checks, in fact there were no checks at all – a striking contrast from 
conditions in the airports of the more central areas and powers.
The sky was a cloudless azure from edge to edge over Tromsø and for the first threequarters of the flight. The meeting of clear blue above and the slightest haze below gave the 
impression of sailing through a vast Rothko painting, of more summery colours than is his 
custom but with the identical combination of vastness and gentle shift from one tone into 
another. Suddenly we over-arched a curving sweep of cloud and the bank was seamless 
below us for the rest of the flight to Svalbard. 
IV
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   27 16/03/2013   13:52:40

28
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   28 16/03/2013   13:52:47

Grey on white on grey on slate on 
grey – the tones of Svalbard greeted us 
as we descended through the cover and 
entered the realm below us. The remains 
of abandoned coal-mining operations and 
the sombre coloured box-like houses of 
Longyearbyen, again only a mile or two 
from the airport, gave this area of human 
habitation on the island an aura of postindustrial wasteland. 
However, having deliberately come to 
the end of the world, and the cooling 
of the senses that attends that, and to a 
land with no trees, almost no soil, and 
at present (with the sun obscured by this 
cloud) no way of telling whether it is day 
or night, it all seems to fit into the mood 
of Luang Por’s vision – of being alone in a 
freezing twilit arctic wasteland, yet utterly 
at peace – the strange merging of death 
and Deathlessness.
As we took our bags down to our 
rooms in the Polar Hotel I noticed a few 
Asian faces among the hotel staff. Ajahn 
Nyanarato had earlier remarked that, at 
first, he had thought that he was the only 
Asian in the area but had spotted one 
more as we made our way here. I pointed 
out the presence of these others to him 
and, as we stood there chatting on the 
subject, we suddenly realized they were 
speaking Thai. 
Within a short while they had 
introduced themselves (“Noo ma jahk 
Petchabuhn, kaa!”) and we found out 
that there were now about 40 Thais in 

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   29 16/03/2013   13:52:52

30
Longyearbyen. As the days progressed, more and more of them 
popped up and came to say hello to us – despite the presence 
of a Thai monastery in Oslo for the last seven years, no monks 
from Thailand had yet visited Svalbard. They each recounted the 
swift spreading of the rumours: “There are 3 monks here and they 
speak Thai but they are not Thai… Where do they come from?” 
Within 24 hours (actually within the first few minutes) it soon 
seemed the most normal thing in the world to be standing on the 
street of the world’s most northerly town and chatting in Thai to 
women from Petchabuhn, Gampaeng Saen and Nakorn Panom.
      
This might not seem so strange, however, it should be borne 
in mind that the population of Svalbard comprises only 1000 
humans; plus, of course, its 5000 polar bears and equally large 
numbers of reindeer.
Up until a little while ago there had only been a couple of 
Thai women here, married to Norwegian men, but in the last 
five years they had begun to persuade their sisters, cousins, etc., 
etc., to come and take up the quiet life and lucrative pay of this 
frozen land. This has been possible since wages are extremely 
high in Norway but those who live on Svalbard pay only 1015% of normal tax-rate. Also, by a strange twist of historical 
happenstance, as Thailand was a signatory of the Treaty of 
Svalbard, in 1922, that gave Norway sovreignty over these islands, 
all Thais have the right to a work permit here.
      
One of the group whom we met last night has a thriving 
Thai massage salon in the little shopping district of the town. 
Our local guides Rupert (from Germany) and Pär (from Sweden) 
also told us that a graduate student from Oslo is even doing a 
social-arthropological thesis on the establishment of the Thai 
community on Svalbard – I have a feeling that we are about to 
become part of part of a Ph.D. dissertation.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   30 16/03/2013   13:52:56

31
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   31 16/03/2013   13:52:57

32
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   32 16/03/2013   13:52:59

33
REINDALEN                   
[May 20th ~ Svalbard] 
“I am completely open, because I know nothing! –
 in a few days, once I know the place,
 then I can have opinions.” 
Luang Por Sumedho, on arrival in Svalbard
To Høgsnyta in Reindalen
After breakfast (gargantuan as per usual) we met again with the Svalbard Wildlife Service 
team who are looking after our stay – Constance, Rupert and Pär. They had taken in the brief 
V
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   33 16/03/2013   13:53:00

34
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   34 16/03/2013   13:53:05

35
we had conveyed to them the previous 
evening  – requesting to go to places that 
offered space, silence and stillness – and 
spent a while describing the route they 
had planned for us that day. It would still 
take them a little while to get all the snowmobiles prepared so we went off for a 
wander around the town for an hour or so. 
Outside the hotel we ran into Somai and 
another local Thai woman, and chatted for 
quite a while, also being introduced to her 
sister who had been on the island for 17 
years – the longest standing Thai there. 
It was soon time to wander back 
(although things move at a very unhurried 
pace here) and climb into the van with 
Rupert and Pär. We only needed to take 
the road for a mile or two, to the valley 
head where we would transfer to snowmobiles and the sleds they pulled behind 
them. The bikes looked very business-like 
and, similarly, the sleds were a simple but 
well-designed arrangement of quarter inch 
ply with reindeer skins to make seats and 
act as blankets and sitting cloths. With the 
two snow-mobiles revving and three of us 
in each sled, we were ready to go. 
      
Soon the sensation of being whisked 
along through the shallow snow, behind 
the muscular roaring of the snowmobiles, 
became a familiar and beloved presence.  
It was quite cozy at first and surprisingly 
smooth a ride, considering that the sleds 
had no springs and the ground was 
hummocked and grassy here and there.
      
We swung southwards through what 
was to become our customary route out 
of Longyearbyen, down T odalen to the 
cluster of four huts used by trappers 
of former times, and by a group of 
Norwegians spying on the German outpost 
at Longyearbyen during World War II; 
currently it’s rented by week-enders and 
subject to occasional polar bear raids – if 
they can’t get through the door or the 
window, they’ll just go through the wall, 
as testified by a stretch of black polythene 
being used to patch the most recent access 
point of visitation.
      
       The pathway rose and fell, wove left 
and right as we gradually crossed over into 
Gangdalen. The air was as still as within a 
vast silent theatre whenever we stopped 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   35 16/03/2013   13:53:08

36
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   36 16/03/2013   13:53:14

37
the bikes for a breather and a leg-stretch. As we reached the end of 
Gangdalen it spilled us onto the vast blue-white plain of Reindalen – 
beneath the snow, an infinitely complex network of rivers and streams 
wove their way to the bay of Kaldbukta and Van Mijenfjord.
      
Rupert led the way up the side of the valley onto a shoulder of land 
on Høgsnyta where we could see for miles across the icy white, tablesmooth plain to the pale blue mountains forming the far wall of the 
dale. It had been overcast since we arrived on Svalbard but for the first 
time we saw some sun breaking through onto the southern slopes of 
the distant range. They seemed to be lit from inside, glowing bright 
amid the hazy atmosphere of the day.
      
We hoiked out the reindeer skins that we had been sitting on in 
the sledges and spread them over the snow, to sit on while we ate 
our lunch of sandwiches. We then strolled about until, without prior 
planning, we each found a favourable spot to sit in, 
where we  remained for the next two hours or so – 
sitting in meditation and contemplating the vast open 
white silence of the arctic wild. The only sounds were 
the occasional chirp of a snow-bunting, the honk of a 
passing goose and the roaring silence of the mind – still, 
no wind.
      
At some unprearranged moment – probably 
conditioned by increasing chill, still limbs and a bynow risen breeze, we re-assembled and after some 
tea, set off in the sleds again. Our path took us back 
through Semmeldalen to Colesdalen, another vast open 
plain, speckled by reindeer grazing on the mosses and 
parties of geese gathering in the newly-unfrozen pools 
that the warming of the spring has now revealed. 
      
Bearing right again we turned up Bødalen and 
rumbled our way, beneath the peaks of Finnesaksla and 
Westbytoppane and found ourselves appearing in the 
little valley of the four huts once again.
      
From there we retraced our route back to the baseThe Hush - final CMYK.indd   37 16/03/2013   13:53:16

38
camp of our van; by now the wind was well up and a few of us 
were getting quite chilled. Rupert had climbed into one of the 
spare insulated jumpsuits and Martin needed the other to ease the 
iciness in his chest. It had been so balmy that morning –2° C. at the 
hotel by the shore – that I had not even bothered with a pullover 
on top of the 2 thermal vests I had on, and I had brushed aside the 
thought of more than one pair of longjohns. That that amount of 
clothing was definitely not enough in the wind-blown open sleds 
at 20 m.p.h. or in the open spaces sitting still on cold rocks for two 
or three hours. At the end of the run I found that I kept saying: “I 
don’t feel cold in any particular place but I can’t stop shivering.”
      
On our return to the hotel we found another Thai woman, 
Namngoe Andressen, waiting to greet us and introduce herself. She 
was the one with the traditional Thai massage salon in the little 
shopping mall in town and had been here in Svalbard for ten years 
or more. She chatted brightly at great length, both 
because she was delighted to have some bhikkhus 
here on her island but also since she has come to 
love this place so much herself. At first her husband 
had said, ”If you won’t come with me to Svalbard, 
we separate!” Now she said she wouldn’t leave and 
return to Thailand even if her husband wanted to. 
The plainness and barrenness of a complete lack of 
trees and arable land, and also lack of distractive 
things to do here, had forced her not to be so 
scattered and confused and had helped turn her 
attention to Dhamma practice. Thus she had come 
to love that very harshness and simplicity – the 
very reasons why Luang Por has felt drawn here for 
so long. The purity and starkness of the landscape 
turns the attention inward.
      
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   38 16/03/2013   13:53:18

39
FINNESAKSLA
[May 21st ~ Svalbard] 
To Finnesaksla, between Bødalen and Colesdalen/Fardalen
The second day of journeying out into the back country was much more overcast than the 
one before and, by the time we reached the valley of the four huts, a light snow had begun 
to fall. The fading definition this brought rendered ridges and folds in the land invisible at 
times and the silence ever more dense and palpable. Sandra flopped down onto her back, 
spread-eagled, and let the snowflakes decorate her as she lay.
This day we swung to the right at the huts, up Bødalen and up onto the slopes of 
Finnesaksla. By the time we stopped it was almost a complete whiteout, but again, as with 
the previous day, the air was perfectly still. As I had been up late, to witness the midnight 
sun, I was weary after the big bag of hot food that Pär and Rupert had kindly provided 
for us. After I had found a good spot at the edge of the slope, with a nice flat sloping rock 
VI
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   39 16/03/2013   13:53:19

40
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   40 16/03/2013   13:53:21

41
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   41 16/03/2013   13:53:25

42
(approximately 15°) behind me I lay back 
and let the snow play its silent music on 
my face.
      
As we had all been a bit chilly the day 
before, we were bundled up to the eyes 
this day (I with an extra three pullovers 
and a down waistcoat and three pairs of 
longjohns) and I was thus warm as toast 
as I lay there. My mind drifted in and out 
of sleep for a while as the different sizes of 
flake landed in a 1,000 different locations 
on the few square inches of exposed skin. 
      
After a while the sleepiness had passed 
and I sat there on my reindeer skin for 
another couple of hours. On the way 
down off the mountain Pär took the slope 
a little more hesitantly than Rupert, with 
the result that the sled and trailer jackknifed across the incline. As if in slow 
motion the whole three-part contraption 
(snowmobile/trailer/sledge) crunched into 
an S-shaped tangle. It took us a while to 
unravel it all and release stuck catches, 
bent bars and get the assembly up and 
running again. 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   42 16/03/2013   13:53:27

43
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   43 16/03/2013   13:53:29

44
      No sooner had we got ourselves moving once 
more, now with Sandra sitting in the pillion (but 
facing Richard and I for some reason) than we made 
a turn to traverse the slope left to right and over we 
went again, this time with Sandra getting part of 
her leg caught under some pieces of the bike and 
trailer. Again, it was like a slow-motion motor-bike 
crash, and onto a bed of eiderdown, the whole 
event seemed vaguely surreal. As it turned out 
Sandra was not badly hurt, the main casualty being 
Pär’s pride and some of the metalwork of the trailer.
 
      
We solved the puzzle by abandoning the use of 
the second trailer and loading it up on the other 
one, to take it home. By this time we were all a bit 
strained again and glad to get back to town for hot 
chocolate at the café. We were all ready for a bath 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   44 16/03/2013   13:53:31

45
and bed by 8:30 but, as we entered the 
hotel, we were greeted again by Namngoe 
and now with her friend Sunantha. Us 
three monks plus Richard joined them 
and, before we knew it, another couple of 
hours had flown by. Of course, it’s hard 
to talk about the passing of time since 
(particularly with an overcast sky) 10:30 at 
night could as easily be 9:00 a.m. or 2 p.m. 
or 2 a.m. – however, we were really ready 
to retire by the time the two of them had 
paid their farewells. They had also bought 
offerings of calendars, grapes and seal-skin 
key-rings along with their armloads of 
news, Dharma-chit-chat and good wishes, 
so it was hard not to be welcoming and 
open-hearted toward their sincerity and 
kindness.
      
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   45 16/03/2013   13:53:35

46
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   46 16/03/2013   13:53:39

47
LYNNDALEN AND THE FOX
[May 21st ~ Svalbard ]
To the slopes of Alteret in Colesdalen, near the bay of Colesbukta
Our last day in the wilderness led us, once again, via T ødalen, Bødalen and into the great 
open expanse of Colesdalen. Even just a day after we were last here, the melting snow had 
revealed that, far from being just a flat basin of land, like Reindalen the valley floor was 
actually an intricate filigree of streams and rivers, marshes and bog. Our trusty drivers 
curved this way and that across the plain to find a way through that was not too slushy or 
an outright stretch of moss or open water. Finally we were stymied in our effort to get to 
the sea shore by a rapidly appearing river that now barred our way. T wo other solo riders 
were there at the time also, and they made it across simply by racing at it at top speed and 
jumping the water – with all of us in sleds, plus trailers etc., we could not follow their lead 
and so, wisdom and ingenuity prevailing, Rupert led us up the valley wall, to the mouth of 
Synndalen instead.
VII
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   47 16/03/2013   13:53:40

48
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   48 16/03/2013   13:53:41

49
We each found our spots again, I 
choosing to climb a steep incline of very 
coarse rock to get up to a bench that 
looked as though it gave views over the 
whole of Isfjord, to the delicate ice-blue 
mountains and glaciers of the far shore, 30 
km. away.
      
Most of the others were on the south 
side of the gulley so Rupert came up and 
sat nearby with his rifle. As the afternoon 
progressed patches of sun on the far 
mountain flicked on and off as breaks 
in the cloud-cover opened and closed. 
Below us, on the floor of the Colesdale 
valley, the river that had barred our access 
became more and more apparent – its nose 
advancing towards us visibly with the 
passing hours.
      
      As we were so near the coast we also 
had the company of a nesting colony 
of little auks. Their cry is somewhat like 
cackling laughter – Rupert told us that 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   49 16/03/2013   13:53:45

50
one of his mates, on listening to a colony 
of several hundred thousand for many 
days, said that it was like the auks had one 
really good old corny joke that they liked 
above all others and that, as they retold it 
over and over to each other, the waves of 
appreciative laughter were ever-refreshed 
and rippled endlessly through the group. 
You could believe it; although, once it was 
familiar, the thunder of inner silence could 
dominate it too.
      
Late in the afternoon, just after I had 
taken a picture or two of the lichens, moss, 
and rock before me I closed my eyes and 
soon heard a yelping bark – “That’s not a 
bird…” I thought.  I opened my eyes and 
slowly turned to my left, to see the dainty 
white figure of… “ A cat?!? No, it’s an arctic 
fox heading my way along the rocky shelf.” 
T o my amazement it kept stepping closer 
and closer, stopping now and then to sniff 
and look around. Closer and closer, until 
it stood within ten to fifteen feet of me. 
I clicked pictures of it as it went by, its 
inquisitive and gentle expressions caught 
in the pixels of the magic box. Its body was 
about the size of a large tom-cat but with 
longer legs and a magnificent bushy tail.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   50 16/03/2013   13:53:50

51
It had dark patches around the eyes, 
while the whole of the rest of its coat was 
a pure refulgent, fulsome white. 
      
What a beautiful crossing of paths: it 
simply came by, probably on its familiar 
hunting route, saw an unremarkable 
object, which probably smelt a bit strange, 
skirted round it and trotted off down the 
steep slope ahead of me. It was as if, there 
in its visitation, was a welcome from the 
arctic spirits themselves – for the rest of 
the afternoon I sat with a stupid grin 
forming and dissolving across my face like 
the bright snow patches shining over from 
the mountains of Isfjord, across the wide 
waters of the bay.
      
Pär pulled us out of two threatened jackknifes, to applause from us, his passengers, 
and we retreated home for the last time 
to Longyearbyen – stopping only for a last 
photo-op by the valley of the four cabins 
where we were passed by a huge flotilla 
of ski-mobiles, a group of business people 
finishing a conference with a bike-trip 
across the island to Barentsberg – the 
Russian settlement. Weary once again we 
headed to our rooms for the night. 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   51 16/03/2013   13:53:52

52
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   52 16/03/2013   13:53:57

53
PETCHABUHN
[May 22nd ~ Svalbard]
Early the next morning we headed out to do a little gift shopping and then were picked up 
by Somai and a taxi to take us to the meal offering at the house of her sister.
About a dozen women and one young man (the only male Thai on the island) had 
gathered there and were plainly delighted to have the “phra” come to visit. They laid on 
a great feast, which they made sure that Richard and Sandra fully partook of as well. It 
had been some years since a few of them had last seen the ochre robe so it was a poignant 
mixture of emotions for them. There was also, needless to say, the jostle of goodhumoured ribbing as they forgot or mishandled this or that element of protocol. They had 
also just had the King of Thailand’s elder sister, Princess Kalyani, visiting last winter so this 
little cluster of village girls (some of whom could not even read Thai) had now had the 
surprising joy and honour of these great beings from their national pantheon coming into 
their midst.
VIII
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   53 16/03/2013   13:53:59

54
Rupert and Pär joined us at the café for 
our final evening cocoa in Svalbard. It had 
been a unique and wonderful time for all 
of us. When we commented to Rupert, 
”We were just saying how impressed we all 
were with your knowledge of ecology and 
wildlife here,” he responded immediately, 
“That’s just tourist chit-chat, that’s not 
knowledge.” 
      
He and Pär then told us that we had 
ruined them, because they had developed 
such a taste for sitting quietly in the lonely 
places. “Jah, I brought a book along with 
me one time but then I thought, ‘Why do 
I want this?’ so I just put it away. So now 
it’s going to be very difficult for the other 
groups that we take out, who always want 
to rush on to the next thing.”
      
When they asked us, finally, “What 
made you want to do this?” We told 
them the story of  Luang Por’s vision of 
the Arctic, when he was newly arrived 
in London in the late 70s, and how he’d 
wanted to come here ever since. 
      
Luang Por said, with great sincerity, “You 
have made my dream come true”; and 
Rupert, arch arctic tough guy, shed a tear.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   54 16/03/2013   13:54:03

55
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   55 16/03/2013   13:54:08

56
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   56 16/03/2013   13:54:10

57
BACK TO THE SHIP
[May 23rd ~ Svalbard & Tromsø]
Rupert and Constance came to collect us at the hotel and took us the few miles out of town 
to the airport. We were touched that they both made the effort to come (Pär was busy with 
a kayaking trip) and also that they stayed with us until we were through security and on to 
the plane. 
Whilst we were in the check-in area, I got into quite a dither as I had packed my passport 
away in my giant holdall not thinking that I’d need to use it – we were staying within 
the borders of Norway, after all. Nevertheless, it was needed for ID and I couldn’t find it 
anywhere – neither in the body of the bag nor in any of the numerous pockets. Mysteriously 
it finally manifested in a pocket that I had already searched through twice… 
I had also lost my hat in Tromsø and been uncharacteristically absent-minded in a dozen 
ways recently. My intuition was that, within the current of the powerful perceptions 
of the 
IX
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   57 16/03/2013   13:54:11

58
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   58 16/03/2013   13:54:15

Arctic, there were also many feelings of 
grave concern and grief for the impending 
loss of my mother, suffering from 
untreatable pancreatic cancer. She had 
insisted that I not miss this trip – she 
would have been 100 times as unhappy 
if I had not gone on it “just to stay with 
her” – but her presence, the love we had 
between us and knowing of her illness 
divided my attention much of the time. 
That division broke through vividly at 
such moments as this.
   We had assumed that we would have a 
few quiet hours in Tromsø between the 
plane landing at 5:00 and the ship docking 
at 11:30: maybe sitting in a café, pottering 
around town or visiting the 24-hour 
botanical gardens or some such. We had 
forgotten that Stig was still around and 
that he had offered to look after us during 
the stopover. Not only had he organized a 
van-hire for us, he also had his brother-inlaw collect our luggage and clear that out of 
the way so that we were not all squashed 
into the vehicle under piles of gear.
   
   He whisked us away, through an 
extraordinary complex of tunnels, under 
Tromsø and the fjord, wherein there were 
numerous roundabouts (we traversed at 
least three) and interconnections with other 
underground roads. It went on and on – 
bearing now this way, now that – so that 
it felt as though we had been conducted 
into the Underworld or the antechamber 
of universes, and I would hardly have been 
surprised to have emerged into the light of 
London, Rio, or 
on the moon.

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   59 16/03/2013   13:54:19

60
   Our road carried us away from the city 
and around the bays and valleys of the 
region. There were so many bends in the 
road, and we came upon water in so many 
different directions and the sky was so 
leaden above us, that it was impossible 
to know which way was north or south 
or whence we had come to get there. 
Eventually Stig brought us to a patch of 
weekend and summer houses, all brightly 
clad in the bold reds, navy blues, and 
honey coloured tones so customary for 
Norwegian homes. We had tea in a hotel 
lounge while raucous laughter, cheering, 
clapping and singing filtered through 
the smoky air from other quarters of the 
building.
   
   As we strolled around after, we came 
upon various scattered groups of folk 
and found that they were mostly the 
administratve staff from the University 
of Tromsø out for their first ever weekend 
in the country together. Some of them 
had even rented a Sami tipi – which bore 
a striking resemblance to the Lakota style 
one at Amaravati – and let us explore 
inside it while they grilled their steaks 
outside on a barbeque by the water.
   
   The whole area is an infinitly complex 
pattern of islets, bays and inlets with their 
own tiny, ten yard-long golden beaches 
and rocky outcrops, often topped with 
spongy moss and short coastal plants. 
   
   As soon as we emerged from the airport 
at Tromsø we had been struck not only by 
the presence of trees again (there are none 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   60 16/03/2013   13:54:23

61
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   61 16/03/2013   13:54:24

62
on Svalbard) but also how all were now 
bursting into leaf, along with a profusion 
of wild flowers along the verges and banks 
beside us. Here too, by the sea-shore tiny 
plantlets were pushing forth their new 
growth for the spring and rejoicing in their 
freedom from snow-cover at last.
   
   We took a long route back to town, 
around the north coast of the island, past 
where the German battleship Tirpitz had 
been run aground and destroyed during 
the war. All that marked the place where 
that ferocious destruction had occurred 
was a small slab of concrete topped with a 
five foot high dark pillar. It is hard to bear 
in mind how these regions of magical 
beauty have also been host to the merciless, 
marauding Norsemen of the 9th – 12th 
centuries and the horrendous sea battles of 
World War II.
   
   Stig took us into town and wove an 
intricate path this way and that to give the 
best photo ops to catch our ship as it drew 
into the harbour. Like a manic taxi driver 
guided by the hands of angels he led us to 
spot after spot – unfortunately the urgency 
of getting on to the next one rendered 
most of the pix askew, blurry or misframed. It was a joy nonetheless to feel his 
keenness to give us the treat of the vision 
of our vessel drawing close to receive us.
   
   Once on board we were all ready to call it 
quits and the day passed by with most of 
us lying low and catching up on some rest. 
Ajahn Nyanarato stayed up to view our 
first sunset since Visakha Puja (it was at 
11:45 p.m.) over the open water, crossing 
south-eastwards out of Svolvær, on the 
largest of the Lofoten Islands. 
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   62 16/03/2013   13:54:26

63
ENDLESS SUNSET
[May 23rd ~ Polarlys]
Now it is morning again and, after grey 
skies in Tromsø, like yesterday it is bright 
above and sparkling on the water. There is a 
mellow mood amongst us six – a feeling of reentering that other world and a drainedness, 
after the peak of our Svalbard days. When we 
crossed the Arctic Circle after breakfast today 
there was no impulse amongst us to do more 
than look out of the windows above the 
stern, at the globe set on a small islet to our 
starboard side. The Journey has evolved from: the naming of the quest; the going forth; the 
reaching of the goal and initiation; now we are on the phase of the return – going home to 
rocky Ithaca, changed and changing in many ways.
X
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   63 16/03/2013   13:54:30

64
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   64 16/03/2013   13:54:31

65
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   65 16/03/2013   13:54:34

66
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   66 16/03/2013   13:54:36

67
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   67 16/03/2013   13:54:38

68
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   68 16/03/2013   13:54:42

69
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   69 16/03/2013   13:54:43

70
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   70 16/03/2013   13:54:46

71
THE CLAMOUR OF SPRING
Progress south: more and more signs of spring and new life – forests, flowers, rich grasses 
abound on all sides lit by the gold north sun. Even on deck folks are taking to the chairs and 
chaise-longues, a sight even the brightest days did not bring as we headed north. 
XI
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   71 16/03/2013   13:54:48

72
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   72 16/03/2013   13:54:55

73
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   73 16/03/2013   13:55:01

74
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   74 16/03/2013   13:55:06

75
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   75 16/03/2013   13:55:11

76
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   76 16/03/2013   13:55:16

77
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   77 16/03/2013   13:55:18

78

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   78 16/03/2013   13:55:22

79
RETURN TO THE DEATHLESS REALM
Re-entry into the world of life and things:
return from the barren margins,
the timeless,
the great silence –
miraculous
how
it all comes with us.
XII
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   79 16/03/2013   13:55:25

80
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   80 16/03/2013   13:55:32

81
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   81 16/03/2013   13:55:34

82
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   82 16/03/2013   13:55:36

83
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   83 16/03/2013   13:55:40

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   84 16/03/2013   13:55:42

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   85 16/03/2013   13:55:42

86
Ajahn (Thai) – (Pali: a –cariya) lit. ‘teacher’ an honorific used for 
senior monastics as well as university professors. 
Bhikkhu – Buddhist monk; lit. ‘one who sees the danger in 
samsa–ra’ or ‘one who lives on alms’.
Buritto (Spanish) – lit. ‘little donkey’; is a type of Mexican 
food consisting of a wheat-flour tortilla wrapped into a thick 
cylindrical shape to completely enclose a filling. 
Cittaviveka – inner or mental seclusion; non-attachment to the 
sense world and mental activity.
Dhamma (Pali) /Dharma (Skt.) – the truth of the way things are; 
the teachings of the Buddha that reveal that truth and elucidate 
the means of realizing it as a direct experience.
Dhamma-dı-pa – the light of Dhamma, meaning the illuminating 
power of Truth.
Esan (Thai) – the North-east region Thailand, bordering on Laos 
and Cambodia.
“If no dawn, when is it OK to breakfast?” – this refers to the 
monastic rule that food can only be consumed between dawn 
and noon each day.
Ka–yaviveka – physical seclusion; withdrawal form the world.
Lakota – the Lakota are an indigenous people of the Great Plains 
of North America. They are part of a confederation of seven 
related Sioux tribes.
Luang Por – ‘Venerable Father’ or ‘Respected Father’; a friendly and 
reverential term of address used for elderly monks.
Mandala (Skt.) – lit. ‘circle’; a symbolic and symmetrically 
patterned circle, having spiritual and ritual significance in both 
Buddhism and Vedanta.
Matoum (Thai) – bael fruit (Aegle marmelos), also known as Bengal 
quince and bilva in Pali.
Nimitta – mark, sign or image; often used to refer to visions 
arising in meditation.
“Noo ma jahk Petchabuhn, kaa!” (Thai) – “I (lit. ‘This little person’) 
come from Petchabuhn, Sir!”
“Not being separated from our robes at dawn” – this refers to the 
rule that Buddhist monastics should always keep their robes 
with them overnight. This rule has the effect that each monastic 
should have their robes within arm’s reach at the time of the 
ending of the night and the beginning of the new day.
Phra (Thai) – from the Pali vara, lit. ‘superb, excellent, surpassing’; 
it is used both as a generic term for Buddhist monks as well as an 
honorific, meaning the equivalent of ‘Venerable’.
Right View – (Pali Samma–-ditthi) is the understanding, and 
contemplation of experience through the lens of the Four Noble 
Truths. These Four are: the universality of unsatisfactoriness, the 
nature of its origin, the fact of its cessation, and the path leading 
to that cessation.
Rocky Ithaca – a frequently occurring epithet for the native island 
of Odysseus, in Homer’s epic poem, The Odyssey. The central theme 
of the tale is the hero’s unrelenting determination to return home 
despite all obstacles.
Sami – the Sami are an indigenous people inhabiting the Arctic 
area of far northern Sweden, Norway, Finland and the Kola 
Peninsula of Russia.
GLOSSARY AND NOTES
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   86 16/03/2013   13:55:42

87
Samma–-sama–dhi – lit. ‘Right’ or ‘Perfect Concentration’; 
one-pointedness of mind and mental stability; the state of 
concentrated calm resulting from meditation practice that is also 
perfectly in tune with reality.
Shiva lingam – a columnar or oval-shaped stone, being a 
representation of the Vedic deity Shiva, used for worship in 
temples.
Stupa – (Skt. stu–pa, Pali thu–pa) lit. ‘a heap’; is a domed or pagodalike structure, usually containing relics of the Buddha or respected 
Elders. They are used as a place of devotion and meditation. Also 
called cetiya (Pali, lit. ‘memorial’) or dagoba (Sinhala).
T atha–gata – ‘Perfect One’; lit. ‘One who has “thus gone” or “thus 
come”’; an epithet of the Buddha.
“The T atha–gata is profound, deep, immeasurable….” – this passage 
is from the Aggi-Vacchagotta Sutta, ‘The Discourse to Vacchagotta 
About Fire,’ to be found at Majjhima Nika–ya 72.20.
“Upasiva, one who has reached the End…” – this passage is from 
the Upasiva Sutta, to be found at Sutta Nipa–ta verses 1074-76.
Uposatha – ‘Observance Day’, the Buddhist traditional ‘holy 
days’ held on every full and new moon; also the recitation of the 
Monastic Rule that is obligatory on those days.
Visa–kha Pu–ja– – the full moon day of May, being the occasion of the 
Buddha’s birth, enlightenment and final passing away. It is the 
biggest annual festival in the Southern Buddhist world
Wat Pah Nanachat – the International Forest Monastery; 
established by Ajahn Chah for his Western students in 1975 and 
located in Ubon Province, North-east Thailand. Ajahn Sumedho 
was its founding abbot.
The Hush - final CMYK.indd   87 16/03/2013   13:55:45

The Hush - final CMYK.indd   88 16/03/2013   13:55:46