Beyond

HAPPILY EVER AFTER
REFLECTIONS ON LIFE GOALS AND PRIORITIES
Beyond
VOLUME
FIVE

PAGE
7 1
THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UNCONDITIONED
A Sunday Afternoon Talk, given at Amaravati, summer 2018
PAGE
41 2
‘WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT NIBBĀNA ’
An evening Dhamma talk given at the Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archive, 
Bangkok, July 2019
PAGE
65 3
SUCHNESS AND THE SQUARE ROOT OF MINUS ONE
An evening Dhamma talk, given at Abhayagiri Monastery,
California, summer 2007
PAGE
85 4
UNSHAKEABLE WELL-BEING
A talk given at ‘The International Conference on Mindfulness –
Science from Within’ , University of Amsterdam, July 2018
PAGE
121 5
... HAPPILY EVER AFTER
An evening Dhamma talk, given at Amaravati, winter 2020

The Good, the Bad and the Unconditioned
This theme of ‘The Good, the Bad and the Unconditioned’ relates to a 
particular format that is found within the Buddha’s teaching, an emphasis 
that is very helpful and significant in terms of our use of the Buddha’s 
teachings, and which contrasts with a number of other religious traditions. 
For example, back in the 19 th Century, Friedrich Nietzsche published a 
book called Beyond Good and Evil  and that was a way of critiquing the moral 
limitations of the philosophies of his time, the Judaeo-Christian morals, or 
what had come down from Greek philosophy and earlier times. Friedrich 
Nietzsche was trying to point out that we can have a very limited view 
of what good and bad are, but if we are going to evolve, we have to look 
beyond that. I wouldn’t suggest Friedrich Nietzsche was an Arahant but his 
effort was, at least conceptually, to look beyond the narrow confines of the 
ordinary ways that we think of good and bad, or good and evil, and the way 
that we as a society have of thinking that, ‘If we could just wipe out evil all 
that would be left would be good, and that would be good.’ I would suggest 
that it is not quite as simple as that.
With respect to these ideas of getting beyond good and evil, and letting go 
of standard moral forms, Nietzsche was perhaps the first person in modern

8
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
times to put that into words, but it became a popular philosophy through 
the 20th century, particularly the ’60s and ’70s. There was a sense in society 
of people breaking free from the limitations of materialistic thinking 
and the moral judgements of religious traditions, of Christian or Jewish 
thinking, as well as the idea of, ‘Why are we limited to that? Why do we 
have to follow those rules? Who said that’s what “good” is? Who said that’s 
what “bad” is? Who’s to say? It’s up to us as free individuals to decide.’ In 
that era, the counterculture, hippie era of the ’60s and ’70s there was a lot 
of throwing off of these kinds of limitations and the discarding of standard 
ideas of good and bad, right and wrong. There was an eagerness to reject 
conformity to the standards of society because, ‘That’s what your parents 
did.’ There was also a breaking out from materialistic viewpoints, and I feel 
there was a very good spirit in that. 
During that period – having been influenced by ideas like those of Nietzsche, 
and also by what is found within some of the Advaita Vedanta, non-dualist 
Vedic teachings, and also within the Zen, the Tibetan and the Theravāda 
traditions – a number of spiritual teachers appeared who were directly 
critiquing the narrow views of good and bad, right and wrong, and society’s 
forms, talking about throwing out all the old conventions and assumptions 
and being completely free, unfettered beings. That was very popular in that 
era. With a lot of the drug-taking, and rejection of limits of the ’50s, there

9
BEYOND
was an upsurge of interest in teachings drawn from different traditions. I 
would say that probably most of the Advaita Vedanta, Vajrayāna and Zen 
masters, who were being so freely quoted, would have shaken their heads 
at some of the things being done, supposedly in the spirit of those nondual teachings. Iconoclastic teachings like, ‘If you meet the Buddha on the 
road kill him’ were intended to help people break through narrow modes 
of thinking in very specific historic contexts. But the historical and social 
frameworks of these statements were ignored, in the ’60s and ’70s. Instead 
young people in the West took these decontextualized religious teachings 
at face value, calling them ‘Crazy Wisdom’. 
A few of us were there. I was born in 1956 so I was a late flower-child. I was 
just coming into my teens in the late ’60s. That kind of Crazy Wisdom idea 
often entailed defying conventions, doing whatever you felt like as long as 
there was a sense of being aware and awake. Then, whatever impulse you 
felt, whether it was indulgent and following a desire, or destructive and 
following an angry feeling, or a jealous feeling, whatever you did, as long 
as you were fully awake and aware of it, then that was considered a pure 
act. If someone complained, ‘You’re behaving in a very threatening and 
angry way! You’re a spiritual practitioner and shouldn’t behave that way!’ 
you could reply, ‘I’m not angry, this is just Angry Buddha manifesting.’ If 
someone said, ‘You’re being really greedy, why are you taking more than

10
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
your share?’ you could retort, ‘I’m not being greedy, this is just Greedy 
Buddha being manifested.’ 
There was a lot of this kind of talk in that era. Many people loved these 
attitudes and we rule-keeping monastics would often be on the receiving 
end of remarks about this. At gatherings where different Buddhist 
traditions were represented, people delighted in telling the famous Zen 
story of the two monks who arrived at the edge of a river, aiming to cross 
the ford through it. The river was flooded and they saw a young woman 
standing on the bank looking anxious and perplexed. She was scared she 
would be swept away if she attempted to cross. One of the monks picked up 
the girl, waded across the river and put her down on the other bank. The 
other monk waded along behind them. The girl thanked them and left. The 
two monks continued down the road together but the monk who didn’t 
carry the girl, finally burst out with, ‘How could you do that!? That was 
outrageous. That was completely against our rules. You know you’re not 
supposed to touch a woman, let alone pick a girl up and carry her like that. 
That’s disgraceful, improper, totally inappropriate!’ The first monk turned 
around and spoke these famous words: ‘I put the girl down by the river, but 
it seems that you are still carrying her.’ I don’t know how many times I have 
heard this story being told. Often there is a sideways glance, or a grin or a 
pointed glare towards us as well: ‘Did you get that, Ajahn?’

11
BEYOND
It is helpful to consider the number of scandals that have occurred 
within the Buddhist world in recent years, concerning some of these 
‘Crazy Wisdom’ masters who explicitly claimed that they are behaving 
from the viewpoint of the ‘transcendent’. Often their behaviour, 
purporting to be the enlightened actions of a spiritual master, has been 
outrageous, sexually exploitative, destructive, and has ended up in
court cases and worse.
I was at a conference of Buddhist teachers with His Holiness the Dalai 
Lama in Dharamsala back in the mid-nineties. There had been a recent 
batch of scandals in the Buddhist teaching community. The conduct of one 
famous teacher was brought into question, as he had been an extremely 
heavy drinker and had had numerous sexual partners, which his wife had 
tolerated. He died of alcoholism before the age of 50, and so his case was 
brought into question. 
One of the teachers at the meeting asked His Holiness about Crazy Wisdom. 
What was his view about trying to teach from ‘the transcendent position’, 
discarding all the conventional forms of correct moral and appropriate 
behaviour? When this term ‘Crazy Wisdom’ was put to His Holiness he 
was utterly puzzled and turning to his translator, Thubten Jinpa, he asked, 
‘“Crazy Wisdom”? What does that mean?’ And then they went into a little 
huddle to try and clarify it. When they came out of the huddle His Holiness

12
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
said to us, ‘I think such behaviour is just crazy, there is no wisdom in it. 
There is no such thing as “crazy wisdom”!’ 
In Tibetan Buddhism, he said, that didn’t exist. There were certain heroes 
of the Himalayan Buddhist world, like Drukpa Kunley, whose behaviour was 
quite extreme in various ways, as was the behaviour of some of the Mahāsiddhas of India. But these figures and their actions were always carefully 
contextualized, they demonstrated their genuine spiritual mastery via 
visible yogic achievements.
At that same conference, a Zen teacher from America spoke up on the same 
issue. He had just separated himself from his own teacher. Even though he 
had just received Dharma transmission from this teacher, he was extremely 
critical of this teacher’s behaviour. The words he used to describe his 
teacher were, ‘He is a ******* narcissistic psychopath who believes his 
**** is his Dharma.’ Very surprisingly, he added, ‘I have no doubt about 
his enlightenment, there’s no question about that, but his behaviour is 
atrocious.’ His Holiness’s English is quite good, so he understood this 
statement, and again he went into a huddle with Thubten Jinpa. 
When His Holiness came out of the huddle he said, ‘I think we have a different understanding about what “enlightenment” means.’ This led to a very 
interesting discussion which made it crystal clear that His Holiness’s point 
of view was in very close accord with that of the Theravāda perspective,

13
BEYOND
which we, as its representatives, were asked to describe. Namely that 
if a person is genuinely and fully enlightened, then their behaviour is 
scrupulously careful, thoughtful and always harmless to others. Enlightened 
persons might sometimes be eccentric, but they never act self-indulgently 
or harmfully. Their behaviour is thus the diametrical opposite of the 
behaviours of the so-called ‘enlightened’ – but actually uncontrolled and 
libidinous – teachers, whom we an d His Holiness had been discussing. 
Unfortunately, this unskilful behaviour of some religious teachers persists 
even today. I feel that many of the distressing situations that have occurred 
within the Buddhist field have come about due to a radical misunderstanding, 
both on the part of the students and the teachers, of how the conditioned 
realm and the Unconditioned relate to each other. We need to understand 
how the ultimate reality relates to our everyday behaviour and the social 
sphere, and our concepts of good and bad. Enlightened behaviour does not 
mean defying the standards of noble, moral behaviour in society, rather it 
means the opposite. 
•  •  •
From a Theravāda perspective, and also from the perspective of His Holiness 
the Dalai Lama, if someone has realized the Unconditioned, is awakened 
and embodies that transcendent reality, then their behaviour will naturally 
be noble and harmless and respectful of the lives of other beings. In the Pali

14
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Canon there is an interesting pair of teachings of the Buddha (A 9.7 & A 9.8) 
where he talks to two different wanderers, Sutavā and Sajjha, about the 
conduct of enlightened beings. In these suttas the Buddha says an Arahant 
is incapable of deliberately taking the life of another being. They might 
tread on an ant because their attention was focused somewhere else, and 
they might not know that, but they are incapable of deliberately taking 
life. They are incapable of stealing, of taking what is not given. They are 
naturally celibate, they have no interest in engaging with others sexually, 
or with themselves in any sexual way. And they are incapable of telling 
a lie, their voice cannot form the words of an untruth. The first four of 
the Eight Precepts, against killing, stealing, sexual activity and lying, are 
absolutely intrinsic to the nature of an enlightened being.
With regard to the Fifth Precept, the reader might be wondering, ‘Are all 
Arahants teetotallers?’ In those two suttas, the fifth principle an Arahant 
keeps is, interestingly, not related to intoxicants but is related to possessions 
and material security. It says an Arahant ‘cannot lay up a store of things’, 
they won’t keep something they get given today for tomorrow. They won’t 
keep a bit extra just in case. One who is enlightened does not deliberately 
stash things away for the next day but lives with a natural sense of trust 
and faith. Our monastic rule reflects that same principle. Of food that is 
offered on any given morning, we eat what we need and we give up what is

15
BEYOND
left over, and we have no control over what happens tomorrow. Our Vinaya 
rule reflects what is the natural behaviour of an enlightened being – we let 
what we are offered today be enough, and what happens tomorrow nobody 
knows... we will see.
•  •  •
There is a would-be ‘life-affirming’ idea, in Western Buddhist and other 
spiritual circles, that if you’re totally enlightened you can do whatever you 
feel like. Even if not inclined towards indulgent behaviours, ‘Why bother 
being a renunciant? Why bother being a nun or a monk? Krishnamurti says 
why bother dressing up in robes and have all these rules? Just be aware!’ 
Naturally it is a point that is frequently made by people who are not in 
robes or by those who are thinking of leaving them. Oftentimes we are 
good friends with the people who say these things and we have interesting 
discussions together on a regular basis. 
In a way, it is a fair point to make. Why would one use these ancient and 
traditional forms, why have so many rules, if the point is to be free and to 
transcend all limitations? 
I feel, however, that this point of view is based on a fundamental 
misunderstanding, a misinterpretation of the relationship between the 
conditioned and the Unconditioned. If we take the Buddha as our archetype 
and exemplar, if he was completely enlightened and totally incapable of

16
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
suffering, why did he choose to live as a penniless monk? Why did he choose 
to live on alms-food, travelling around on foot through North-East India for 
45 years? This is a very significant point and one that doesn’t usually get 
considered or mentioned by the more free-wheeling ‘enlightened’ types. 
There is a teaching that relates to this issue that is found in a dialogue 
between the Buddha and a man called Māgandiya (M 75). Māgandiya is 
apparently a life-affirming, sensualist type, so he can’t figure out why 
anyone interested in freedom and happiness would not want to enjoy 
everything in the sensory world: ‘It’s all there for the taking, just feast 
yourself. It’s all there to be enjoyed, come on, join the party.’ He thinks 
the Buddha is a life-negator, ‘a destroyer of growth’ (bhūnahuno), and asks 
the Buddha what’s the point of renunciation because it seems like such a 
loss, ‘Why give up so many good things, which are so beautiful, interesting, 
delightful and enjoyable?’ The Buddha then says to Māgandiya, ‘Māgandiya, 
imagine if there was a man who was wealthy and who lived a luxurious life, 
indulging in many sensual pleasures. Then, when his life came to an end, on 
account of his good conduct, he reappeared as a deva prince in the Nandana 
Grove, up in the Tavatiṃsa Heaven, the Heaven of the Thirty-three Deities. 
There this deva prince has 500 beautiful celestial nymphs as his retinue. All 
that being the case do you think that he would be interested, would he pine 
for his life as a human being, with its human sensual pleasures?’ Māgandiya

17
BEYOND
said, ‘Well no, of course not, there’s no comparison. If he was a deva prince 
up in the Nandana grove, life in the human realm would be of no interest to 
him – heavenly sensual pleasures, divine bliss such as that is more excellent 
and sublime than human sensual pleasure.’ 
Then the Buddha says, ‘So too, Māgandiya, the kind of happiness I enjoy, 
with a heart freed from greed, hatred and delusion, is a more extreme kind 
of happiness and delight. It is a delight apart from sensual pleasures, apart 
from unwholesome states, which surpasses divine bliss. Since I take delight 
in that, I do not envy what is inferior.’ This is to say that the Buddha’s 
happiness, the bliss of the awakened, liberated mind, is far more delightful 
than any happiness that can be found through sensual experiences. It’s as if 
the Buddha was saying, ‘It is more delightful and complete a happiness than 
any that you can find here in the world through food and music, or your 
fashionable clothes and decorations. It’s not because I dismiss or criticize 
that kind of happiness. It’s just that I’m not interested by it, because the 
kind of happiness that I know is far beyond that. There is no comparison.’ 
The Buddha is pointing out that the joyfulness of the awakened mind, 
the free mind, is such that there’s no need to seek after particular kinds 
of sensual experience to find happiness, because the awake mind, the free 
mind in itself is intrinsically joyful, peaceful, content, fulfilled, and filled 
with delight. Therefore, the more simple one’s life is on the material plane,

18
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
the easier it is to appreciate that inner happiness, that inner freedom. This 
reality is what lies behind many of the principles he established in his 
teachings over the years, including his advice for skilful living.
•  •  •
On the subject of going beyond good and evil Ajahn Chah has said: 
If there is no long there is no short, if there is no right, there can be no 
wrong. People these days study away, looking for good and evil, and 
that which is beyond good and evil they know nothing of. All they know 
is the right and wrong. ‘I’m going to take what is right, I don’t want to 
know about the wrong. Why should I?’ If you try to take only what is 
right, in a short time it will go wrong again, right leads to wrong. People 
keep searching among the right and wrong and don’t try to find what 
is neither right nor wrong. They study about good and evil, they search 
for virtue, but they know nothing of that which is beyond good and evil. 
They study the long and short but that which is neither long nor short 
they know nothing of. ... They didn’t study that which is beyond good 
and evil, this is what you should study.
(‘Still Flowing Water’, Collected Teachings, p 373)
In this way we can dwell in a natural state, which is peace and tranquillity, 
if we are criticized, we remain undisturbed. If we are praised, we’re

19
BEYOND
undisturbed. Let things be in this way, don’t be influenced by others. 
This is freedom. Knowing the two extremes for what they are and not 
stopping at either side, we can experience well-being. This is genuine 
happiness and peace, transcending all things of the world. We transcend 
all good and evil and are above cause and effect, beyond birth and death.
(‘Nibbāna Paccayo Hotu’, Being Dharma, p 193) 
The original mind is beyond good and bad. This is the original nature of 
the mind. If you feel happy over experiencing a pleasant mind object, 
that’s delusion. If you feel unhappy over experiencing any unpleasant 
mind object, that is delusion. Unpleasant mind-objects make you suffer, 
pleasant ones make you happy, this is the world. Mind-objects come 
with the world, they are the world. They give rise to happiness, and 
suffering, good and evil, and everything that is subject to impermanence 
and uncertainty. When you separate from the original mind everything 
becomes uncertain – there is just unending birth and death, uncertainty 
and apprehensiveness, suffering and hardship, without any way of 
halting it, or bringing it to cessation.
(‘The Path to Peace’, Collected Teachings, p 713)
The teaching of Buddhism is about giving up evil and practising good, and 
then when evil is given up and goodness is established, you must let go 
of both good and evil. We have already heard enough about wholesome

20
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
and unwholesome conditions to understand something about them, so 
I’d like to talk about the Middle Way, that is, the path to transcend both 
those things. (‘The Middle Way Within’, Collected Teachings, p 1)
The basic structure within the Buddha’s teachings is that encouragement 
to let go of unwholesome impulses. If they are heedlessly followed, if there 
is an angry, a greedy, a selfish or a lustful impulse, if those are followed and 
acted upon, then there’s necessarily going to be a painful result coming 
from that. If those impulses are recognized and understood, the training is 
to not think of those as absolutely evil or that they make you a bad person 
in an absolute way, but rather to see it in terms of impersonal natural law: 
if this impulse is followed, pain will surely come afterward. This angry 
feeling was acted upon so here is the painful result. We train ourselves to 
recognize those unwholesome and unskilful impulses – these are called 
akusala, ‘unwholesome’ actions.
Those qualities that are wholesome, that lead to peace of mind, to harmony 
between ourselves and others, to a brightness of heart, to kindness, 
generosity, unselfishness, and restraint with regard to destructive or 
greedy or selfish impulses, if those are followed and developed, this is 
not regarded as an absolute good but rather as simply kusala, ‘wholesome’ 
behaviour. It is realized that when the mind inclines towards generosity 
and unselfishness, and towards concentration, the result is pleasant for the

21
BEYOND
person concerned and is also pleasant for other people connected with this
person. Everybody gains.
Delusion is the way in which the mind tries to make the impermanent 
permanent. It tries to make the unsatisfactory satisfactory, and it tries to 
make what is not-self into self. That’s a classic description of delusion. It 
is when we look for certainty in that which is uncertain and when we look 
for satisfaction in that which can’t satisfy. It doesn’t mean we can’t have 
pleasant experiences, like Māgandiya: ‘How do you say no to all this stuff? 
If you eat a sweet mango, isn’t it delicious?’ Māgandiya doesn’t use this 
example in that sutta, but I imagine that the Buddha would say, ‘Yes, it’s 
delicious’ – but how many mangoes can you eat? If you are hungry and you 
are given a mango, and you are not diabetic, the sweetness is very pleasant 
to you, you say ‘It’s delicious.’ However, if you think eating a mango is 
happiness then two mangoes, three, four, five mangoes, fifteen mangoes... 
will that automatically make you happier?
Ajahn Chah, being the kind of Dhammic extremist that he was, had a way 
of investigating this question. He would on occasion give his mind what it 
wanted. If the reader is acquainted with Ajahn Chah’s teachings, they will 
have noticed that a number of his Dhamma talks involve food of various 
kinds. One year, when he was still a young monk, the mango season came 
around. On the morning alms-round he could see himself getting excited as

22
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
he and the line of monks walked through the village. While very properly 
looking at the ground and walking along, he couldn’t help but notice that 
the mango trees were laden and the golden fruits were plentiful this year. 
One after another the villagers made their offerings and the bowls were 
filled by the end of the round. Eager to get back to the monastery, he saw 
his mind getting overexcited by the prospect of the sweet fruits. So he said 
to himself, ‘Mangoes? You want mangoes? That will make you happy? I’ll 
give you mangoes.’ He ate thirty-seven of them, as I recall. He kept going 
until he physically couldn’t eat any more. ‘You want mangoes, you’ll get 
mangoes. Let’s see if that does bring you lasting happiness!’
There was another occasion he spoke of when he followed a similar practice. 
This was a festival day when local people offered many little pyramidal 
sweets. These are made of the sticky gluten paste you get from rice, 
wrapped in a banana leaf. They are chewy and gluey, with sweet stuff in the 
middle. They are called kanom sai. The time of this festival was approaching. 
He could hear his mind thinking, ‘It’s coming, festival day is coming!’ He 
could see his mind creating around these kanom sai , and so, again, he did 
the same thing; he ate eighty-four of them, I believe. ‘You want them? You 
really want them? Fine, I’ll give you them.’ He had a big alms-bowl filled 
with these things.

23
BEYOND
He was a very hands-on kind of teacher, he would use object lessons such as 
these to get the message through in non-conceptual, non-verbal, visceral 
ways: ‘This will make you happy – you believe that lasting happiness is in 
the kanom sai – so more will make you happier, right? OK let’s test it out!’ By 
the time he got to number eighty-four, the lesson was not quite done as the 
second part was living with the results! He would do this kind of exercise 
for himself and, if it seemed useful, encourage that for others: ‘Once in a 
while, give your mind what it’s asking for, as long as it’s not breaking any 
Precepts. Why? Because if you keep saying “No, no, I shouldn’t, I shouldn’t,” 
then you make it powerful, you give the craving strength.’
The delusion is that the happiness is in the kanom sai, or in the mango or 
whatever, but it’s not, the happiness is in the mind. These lessons were 
about breaking the delusion that happiness is in the sweet, and that 
therefore more sweets equals more happiness. He would do it deliberately. 
When he was getting full and part of him was begging to stop, he would say, 
‘No, you have to keep going, you wanted this, so here it is. Keep going.’ He 
would, until he was literally incapable of eating any more. Then he would 
mindfully watch. ‘You got what you wanted, now how is it?’
During the day, he would watch his mind, while his guts were churning 
away: ‘You got what you wanted, how does it feel? Where’s the happiness?’ 
It was a reflective process. He was using that, examining it, ‘You followed

24
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
that, you believed the promise that that was where happiness was, that 
it was in that taste, but now where is it? What’s the result?’ That kind of 
careful observation needs to be carried out free of self-view. It’s not to 
create self-hatred: ‘I’m a bad monk, I’ve got so many food obsessions, I’m 
awful!’ Rather it is saying, ‘Here’s the cause, here’s the effect. Now, how 
does it feel? What’s the result of it?’ And then you let the result speak for 
itself, again in a non-conceptual, visceral, somatic way. In this manner he 
became extremely wise around desire and obsessions. 
I should add: Please follow this advice with great care! This is a ‘ health 
warning’, so please use this kind of practice with great caution! As they say, 
‘Don’t try this at home!’ That said, I would not belittle the fact that these 
were very skilful ways of breaking those delusions. What the mind is saying 
is, ‘This makes me happy, hearing this beautiful sound makes me happy,’ or 
‘That’s a delicious taste,’ or ‘That’s a beautiful object,’ but it’s not – from its 
own side it is just what it is, neither good nor bad, beautiful or ugly. When 
we hear music and think, ‘It’s so beautiful, I love that music.’ We don’t love 
the music, we love what happens in our heart and mind when the music 
is heard. What we love is our own mind. It’s the music which triggers that 
effect but we don’t love the music, we love the place the music takes us to.
•  •  •

25
BEYOND
The more that we recognize that mind is the thing which really matters, 
the more we then recognize that happiness is not dependent on the object, 
instead our happiness is dependent on our mind and our attitude. The more 
we work in that way on the mind, the heart, developing skilful attitudes, 
the more our happiness becomes independent of circumstances, whether 
people approve of us or disapprove of us. If we have a cold, rainy weekend, 
not many people in England are happy about that. But if there have just been 
six weeks of baking hot weather, with everything parched under cloudless 
skies, then cold and rainy is great. ‘At last!’ All perception is conditioned. 
The more we recognize that ‘The mind is the forerunner of all things’ (Dhp 
1), the more our happiness becomes independent of circumstances, whether 
we are healthy or sick. It doesn’t mean that we’re numb or insensitive, but 
our happiness is independent of the ups and downs of life.
In terms of Dhamma practice, what we can use effectively on a day to 
day basis is simply to be aware that this particular set of perceptions 
at this moment has come from certain causes. We don’t have to name 
exactly how. It’s sufficient to be able to say, ‘The pattern of perceptions 
and feelings in this moment has come together through a huge variety of 
causes and conditions and, right now, it feels this way. In this moment, 
it’s like this.’ Just as if we are listening to an orchestra: there are maybe 
sixty or seventy instruments present, we don’t have to know what

26
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
each instrument is playing, or know how each instrument works, 
how the strings vibrate, or how the air oscillates inside the flutes, 
drums or trombones, but we know the piece of music sounds like this. 
When the mind knows ‘This is the way it is’, that which knows this is not 
identified with the object known. The greater the degree of sati-paññā, 
mindfulness and wisdom, the greater the degree of insight into the way 
things are and the more our mind will know the qualities of this present 
reality without it being clouded by greed, hatred, delusion or fear. 
Then that wise appreciation of the conditioned, the experiential field 
of this moment, can help the mind to let go, to be awake and to realize 
the Unconditioned. The Unconditioned never disappears, but because of 
our attention to what we see, hear, touch, taste, smell and think, we miss 
it. We don’t notice the space in the room, because our attention goes to 
the objects. We don’t notice the spaces between the words, because our 
attention is going to the words. If you hold up your hand and ask yourself, 
‘What do I see?’ you are most likely to say, ‘A hand with five fingers.’ We 
don’t say, ‘I see the space around my hand and between my fingers.’ 
For the most part we don’t notice space, we don’t notice the silence behind 
and between sounds. We don’t notice stillness because our attention gets 
caught by movement. Ajahn Sumedho often emphasizes this, drawing our 
attention to the ‘sound of silence’. By noticing space, the citta is aided in

27
BEYOND
recognizing the suchness of things, the way things are, rather than being 
caught up in their content. ‘In this moment it’s this way.’ This which knows 
the present is attuned to it, but there is also a liberation from the present; 
there’s a transcendence of it.
Just because the mind is awake to the Unconditioned doesn’t mean 
it’s disconnected from the conditioned. It’s a participatory reality. I 
don’t like to use words like ‘non-attachment’ all the time, or being ‘the 
watcher’, or ‘the observer’, I like the phrase ‘unentangled participation’. 
It’s a bit of a cumbersome term but it can be shrunk down to ‘hands-on
letting go’ if you like.
Just because the mind is detached it doesn’t mean to say it’s passive or 
abstracted, dissociated. Sometimes what we detach from is our hesitancy to 
act. Therefore, letting go can lead to more activity and more engagement. If 
it was impossible to realize the Unconditioned and simultaneously engage 
with the conditioned, how could the Buddha have ever taught? How could 
he ever have established the Sangha, the Fourfold Assembly of lay-people 
and monastics? 
The Buddha was an incredibly creative thinker, highly observant and 
imaginative. His lists of similes, the completely unique ways in which he 
described things, arose spontaneously when talking to people. He’d be 
talking to a farmer, and he would say that there are eleven things to take

28
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
care of in terms of looking after cows, in cow husbandry (at M 33), and then 
he would match that list with exactly with what you need to do to look after 
the mind. With a brahmin who believed in ritual bathing for purification, 
the Buddha would use similes relating to water (S 46.35). When talking with 
fire worshippers he would use similes related to fire (S 35.28). And so forth. 
Out of the awakening of the mind to the Dhamma, to the fundamental 
reality, the Buddha’s attunement to the conditioned world became more 
pronounced and resulted in an ongoing harmonious engagement with all 
things. There was mindfulness and wisdom, kindness and compassion, 
and the mind’s imaginative and verbal capacity to put things together and 
explain was unobstructed. That’s why he was ‘the unexcelled teacher of 
gods and humans’. Because he could notice a situation and his mind would 
spontaneously come up with a teaching – forms and images that were 
meaningful to that person at that time. 
In some of the commentarial literature there is the sense that an Arahant 
is almost like a zombie – they can’t look after themselves, can’t make 
their own decisions. This is ridiculous. It’s a big mistake to think that 
if the mind is awake to the Unconditioned and realizes Nibbāna it is 
therefore disconnected from the everyday sense world and it can’t do 
anything practical. The life of the Buddha completely belies that. He was 
marvellously active, thoughtful and attentive to everything around him, 
he was very observant, and he was doing all that while being totally awake

29
BEYOND
to the transcendent reality. The one does not occlude or shut out the other, 
but rather they are two aspects of the same nature.
•  •  •
The teaching about sīla, virtue and conduct, is to do with recognizing the 
unwholesome and letting go of it, and recognizing the wholesome and 
cultivating, sustaining it. This is what the Buddha also spoke of as Right 
Effort. That’s the structure in terms of conduct. Then, as the various 
quotations from Ajahn Chah pointed out, the challenge is to let go, to not 
attach even to goodness. On a basic level we might say, ‘This is bad and 
wrong, we need to wipe it out; this is good and helpful, so we should hang 
on to this.’ That has been a familiar theme in Western society hasn’t it? 
To try and destroy what is labelled as ‘evil’. But how often has the effort 
to destroy ‘evil’, to wipe out what we don’t like or approve of, led to more 
harm and destruction? There are many painful instances: the Christian 
Church persecuting heretics, burning witches; Nazi Germany wiping out 
Jews, gay people and the Roma... the list could go on, and include many 
many countries across the world. ‘Get rid of what we see as evil, and what 
will remain will be our version of good.’ However, in those very efforts, 
some of which might have started out with a good intention, the very effort 
of judging others as good and bad, and trying to wipe out the bad and leave 
only the good, can end up doing far mor e harm.

30
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Alexander Solzhenitsyn wrote, in The Gulag Archipelago:
If only there were evil people somewhere insidiously committing 
evil deeds, and it were necessary only to separate them from the rest of 
us and destroy them. Unfortunately, the battle line between good and 
evil runs through the heart of every person.
Yes, if only we could isolate the bad and destroy it, then all that would 
be left would be the good. But life doesn’t work that way. As Solzhenitsyn 
insightfully points out, the heart is capable of the wholesome and the 
noble and the beautiful and it is capable of the harmful and destructive and 
everything in between.
When Ajahn Chah speaks about letting go of dualistic ways of thinking, it’s 
about letting go of the Dhamma as a conditioned structure. Letting go of 
the ideas, letting go of the forms. In this respect, the teachings of wisdom, 
and particularly the teachings about not-self, are very important. The 
teaching the Buddha gave, that we have to let go of the unwholesome and 
cultivate the wholesome, maximises the conditions for helping the mind to 
awaken. In a way, evil is not absolutely evil, good is not absolutely good, but 
the reason we do cultivate goodness is that it helps things to be simple. It 
uncomplicates our heart and mind, it clarifies – goodness clarifies. On the 
other hand, if I act in ways which are deceitful, destructive, selfish, unkind, 
cruel, that all complicates, that makes the heart confused and tense. One

31
BEYOND
can say, ultimately, there is no good and evil, as it is put in Hamlet, ‘There 
is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so’ (Act 2 Sc. 2). There 
is nothing that is either intrinsically good or intrinsically bad, but our 
thinking makes it so – this is the way it is.
The Buddha points out that what we call ‘wholesome’, kusala, is that which 
helps to clarify the mind and is what helps to lead us to simplicity and 
ease of heart. The ‘unwholesome’, akusala, meanwhile, leads our minds 
to confusion, to alienation, insecurity and stress and therefore it makes 
things harder to see and understand. If you have told someone a lie, during 
the day, or if you have cheated in some respect during the day, or you’ve 
killed something during the day, when you sit down to meditate, what is 
right there? You remember the lie, you remember those unkind words, 
you remember that deceitful, destructive act. It’s right here. That’s what 
you feel. If instead you’ve acted in a way that is harmless and kind, and 
you’ve been honest, then when you sit down to meditate in the evening, 
there is an easeful brightness in the heart. The whole system is settled, 
relaxed, alert and open. That is why goodness is ‘good’; because it helps to 
clarify the mind. That’s why badness is ‘bad’; because it confuses the mind. 
This is a non-personal process of cause and effect and the essence of it, in 
terms of the Buddha’s approach, is that good and bad are not absolutes but

32
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
rather to be known and worked with according to the effects they have 
on the human level. When the citta is suffused with peacefulness and the 
clarity that comes as a result of skilful action, then wisdom helps the mind 
to awaken to the Unconditioned, the ultimate reality of things.
•  •  •
Good and bad are familiar to us, but the Unconditioned is mysterious; in 
the West we didn’t grow up with this idea, so we might not understand 
it. The Unconditioned, asaṅkhata, is a term referring to the fundamental 
nature of reality, to the transcendent nature of Dhamma. There 
are several passages where the Buddha speaks about this directly, 
particularly in the collection of teachings called the Udāna or ‘The Inspired 
Utterances’. The eighth chapter of the Udāna, has two important suttas
on this theme:
There is the Unborn, the Unoriginated, the Uncreated, the Unconditioned. 
If there was not the Unborn, the Unoriginated, the Uncreated, the 
Unconditioned, then liberation from the born, the originated, the 
created, the conditioned, would not be possible. 
But because there is the Unborn, the Unoriginated, the Uncreated, the 
Unconditioned, therefore liberation from the born, the originated, the 
created, the conditioned, is possible. (Ud 8.3, Iti 43)

33
BEYOND
This is one of Ajahn Sumedho’s favourite teachings. It is reminding us that 
beyond our habitual ways of seeing the world in terms of sight, sound, 
smell, taste, touch, thought, emotion and imagination, beyond our habits 
of seeing things in terms of self and other, there is a fundamental reality 
– timeless, selfless, unlocated, ‘outside of cause and above effect’ as Ajahn 
Chah would put it. 
If the spiritual path is being developed wisely – ‘practising Dhamma in 
accordance with Dhamma’ ( dhammānudhammāpaṭipatti ) – along the way to 
that full clarity and security, the inclination towards virtue and simplicity 
will naturally get stronger (as in A 9.7 & A 9.8, above). In the Jātaka stories, 
the stories of the Buddha’s previous births, an interesting point is made 
(in Jāt 431). It is said that during the course of his incalculable number of 
lives, the Bodhisatta broke most of the Precepts, he took life, he engaged 
in sexual misconduct, he stole things, he indulged in intoxicants, all of 
which is woven into many of the Jātaka stories. However, it says the one 
Precept he never broke after he made the Bodhisatta Vow was the Fourth 
Precept. This is because truthfulness is intrinsic to the vow to become a 
Buddha – the adherence of the heart to Dhamma means it is incapable of 
deceit. So, through all those lifetimes, where he seduced people’s wives, 
got drunk on various different things, or was a warrior who killed many 
people, he never told a lie. I understand this is mythology, but I feel it’s an 
important and powerful myth. During that entire course of time, he was

34
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
not capable of any kind of deceit. In a way this puts the Fourth Precept in 
a very unique position – the quality that is most naturally intrinsic to the
awake mind is truthfulness. 
It might be a bit intimidating to hear this, intimidating to our egos and our 
bad habits, but it’s also refreshing to the heart. It’s something which makes 
sense. If Dhamma is fully awakened to, it expresses itself in truthful words. 
Sometimes we find we can heartily rejoice in being on retreat or sitting 
in meditation. We love to meditate, the mind is peaceful and quiet. You 
can forget about your body, forget about other people, forget about your 
job, your possessions, your list of urgent things to do, your unanswered 
emails. It’s all gone! The mind can just focus on the ultimate reality of the 
present moment. We love to be on retreats, in a retreat centre, other people 
doing the cooking, everyone is silent, we don’t have to perform socially, 
we don’t have to be anybody. We can revere the Unconditioned, the mind 
in a free state is enjoying that quality of blessed simplicity. However, in 
that enjoyment, and investing in that formless and uncomplicated quality 
we can unconsciously be rejecting having to be a person, having a job, 
having emails that need to be answered urgently, having to talk to people, 
having to deal with the body and our illnesses. This is quite common in 
the Buddhist meditation world; a relishing of the Unconditioned and a 
dismissiveness towards the conditioned: ‘I don’t want to bother with that

35
BEYOND
grubby reality, that’s just the conditioned world. I’m only interested in the 
Unconditioned, that’s all. Enlightenment! That’s all that matters.’ I’ve had 
those attitudes myself. 
However, this is a very limited, distorted and destructive view. By trying 
to grasp the Unconditioned, we’re actually creating more birth. We’re 
being born into attachment to simplicity, a disconnection from the sense 
world, from personality, relationships and so forth. This is destructive 
because we’re thereby creating the fear that ‘ the world’ is going to intrude 
and bother ‘ me’. This vibhavataṇhā, the attempted rejection of the world, 
ironically, only serves to reify the world, tying our mind more firmly to 
ignorance, delusion and the painful wheel of birth and death.
The story of the Buddha’s enlightenment speaks to this issue of the 
relationship between the conditioned and Unconditioned. The Bodhisatta 
sat down under the Bodhi Tree and made his resolve to not move from the 
spot until full and complete enlightenment had been realized. He knew that 
the pāramitās, the spiritual perfections, were very close to being fulfilled. 
The armies of Māra show up, representing the forces of fear, of desire and 
lastly of responsibility. To all of these the Buddha responds in the same 
way; he doesn’t oppose Māra, he doesn’t attack Māra, he just says, ‘I know 
you Māra.’ In this respect Māra is the force of death, Māra actually means 
‘death’. Rather than trying to destroy evil and wipe it out, the gesture of the

36
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Buddha is to know it. That’s the way both good and bad are transcended, 
both the harmful and the beneficial: ‘I know this. I know what you are. I 
know what this is.’ At that moment, Māra is defeated, but he won’t retreat. 
He won’t admit defeat. Even though none of his attacks have worked, 
he still tries to intimidate the Buddha: ‘Who do you think you are? You 
walked out on your wife and child – you’re a failed husband. You walked 
out on your five ascetic companions and you started eating ordinary food 
– you’re a failed yogi and now you are trying to pretend to everyone that 
you are fully enlightened. You’re a failure! You are nothing, you have no 
right to claim any kind of leadership. It’s I, I’m the only one that can claim 
rightful leadership of the universe. I am the one who is foremost in the 
Great Trichiliocosm. Isn’t that right?’ His vast army roars, ‘Yes indeed Your 
Majesty, you are truly the foremost in the universe.’ Māra then says to the 
Buddha, ‘See, these are my witnesses, whom do you have to bear witness to 
what you say you are?’
This is where we find the perfect representation of the connection between 
the conditioned and the Unconditioned: the Buddha reaches down and 
touches the earth and calls on the Earth Goddess, Dharaṇī, to be his witness. 
She rises up and declares to Māra, ‘This is my true son, and he has done 
everything necessary to claim full and complete enlightenment and you, 
Māra, are defeated.’ At this point she unwraps her hair and a huge flood

37
BEYOND
appears from her unbound tresses. Mara’s armies are washed away, to 
come back later on their knees with flowers and apologies.
This Earth Witness gesture is highly significant. At first, in the heart of the 
Buddha, while the internal experience of enlightenment was there, the citta 
was completely liberated but as long as this was just an internal experience 
of the Unconditioned, the liberation wasn’t complete – Māra wouldn’t 
concede defeat. It was only when the Buddha reached down and touched 
the earth and called on the Earth Goddess to witness to his Awakening, 
only when her declaration and her avowal of kinship with the Buddha were 
pronounced, that Māra was entirely overcome.
The Buddha’s touching of the earth, and the Earth Goddess’s response, 
are a recognition that there is the Unconditioned but there is also the 
conditioned – there’s this body that needs to breathe, which needs to 
eat, which has a biological, evolutionary source, which experiences 
gravity and is connected to the lives of other beings. Yes, there is 
this, and in that gesture of acknowledging the conditioned, total and 
complete enlightenment is fulfilled. The embracing, the acceptance, of 
the world leads to freedom from its boundaries. What’s more, the result 
of that full acceptance and attunement is that the world rings out in joy 
– the devas celebrate, the earth quakes, and, as Joseph Campbell described
the response of the forces of nature:

38
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Sitting at the world navel, pressing back through the welling creative 
force that was surging into and through his own being, the Buddha 
actually broke back into the void beyond, and – ironically – the universe 
immediately burst into bloom.
(The Masks of God: Oriental Mythology , Ch. 1, Pt. 3)
The process of enlightenment, at least according to this mythic scenario, 
was thus not fulfilled until the conditioned had been fully accepted, 
symbolized by the touching of the earth. From that time forth the Buddha 
travelled and taught for 45 years, living as a wandering monk in NorthEast India, sharing his understanding. This engagement with the world, and 
offering of the teaching, was not an imposition on his freedom but rather 
an expression of it. 
The Buddha’s life is an archetype for us. It demonstrates how the Middle 
Way is this perfect, mysterious integration of the conditioned and the 
Unconditioned. It encourages the understanding that ‘Each something is 
a celebration of the nothing that supports it,’ as John Cage put it. If the 
good and bad, the conditioned, are grasped and identified with, they lead to 
limited, worldly goals; if the Unconditioned alone is conceptually grasped, 
it leads to fear and alienation; if they are recognized and integrated 
in the Middle Way then the conditioned is a natural expression of the

39
BEYOND
heart’s awakening. There is both a total liberation from the limits of the 
conditioned, but also a complete attunement to the conditioned. As in the 
life of the Buddha himself, the Unconditioned is embodied.

‘We Need to Talk About Nibbāna’
‘We Need to Talk about Nibbāna’ was a statement made by Ajahn 
Buddhadāsa, in his book, Nibbāna for Everyone . It is an excellent resource 
for wise reflections on this often misunderstood area of the teachings. 
One of the themes that he emphasises is that we have some strange ideas 
about Nibbāna in the Buddhist tradition, in Thailand, in the West and other 
places. Therefore it’s good to begin by clarifying – what do we mean by this 
word, Nibbāna (in Pali) or Nirvāṇa, (in Sanskrit). What  possible use could 
this word have for us? What kind of meaning might it have in our lives? 
Ajahn Buddhadāsa felt the subject was so important that he said, ‘If we don’t 
talk about Nibbāna, Buddhism is as good as dead.’ Ajahn Buddhadāsa is one 
who doesn’t hold back, he’s very straightforward, so that’s a significant 
statement to contemplate, to reflect on, ‘If we don’t talk about Nibbāna, 
Buddhism is as good as dead.’ That’s a declaration to get our attention, so 
why did he make it?
Ajahn Pasanno and I also wrote a book about Nibbāna, entitled The Island, 
with a similar intention. We spent about ten years putting it together. We 
also felt that Nibbāna was a much neglected subject, something that was 
curiously little talked about in Buddhist circles in the West. Hence we put

42
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
forth a steady effort to bring this book into being in order to provide as 
clear a picture of the territory as we could. 
Chapter One, line one, begins with a statement about the meaning of
the word:
Nibbāna, or Nirvāṇa, in Sanskrit, is a word that is used to describe an 
experience. When the heart is free of all obscurations, and is utterly 
in accord with nature, ultimate reality, Dhamma, it experiences perfect 
peace, joy and contentment.
This set of qualities is what Nibbāna describes. The purpose of this 
book is to outline particular teachings of the Buddha that point to and 
illuminate ultimate reality, and ways this can be realized. From the 
Buddhist point of view, the realization of Nibbāna is the fulfilment of the 
highest human potential, a potential that exists in all of us, regardless of 
nationality or creed.
(The Island, p 1)
When we consider Nibbāna, it needs to be appreciated that the way the 
word is used in different Buddhist cultures can vary a lot. One way that 
it’s commonly talked about is that at the end of the life of an Arahant, 
they then realize Nibbāna, or it is said they ‘go to Nibbāna’. This way of 
speaking represents Nibbāna as some kind of super-heaven, like a kind of 
special prize, a place where the Arahants stay forever and never get born

43
BEYOND
again into any other realm. I’m kind of joking, but also kind of not joking. 
This is the sort of language that gets used very often in common speech. In 
Ajahn Buddhadāsa’s teachings he makes it very clear that Nibbāna has got 
nothing to do with death. But rather, the word Nibbāna is speaking about 
the potential, the quality of the heart when it awakens to reality, to its 
own reality, which is the reality of all things. When the heart awakens to 
Dhamma, then the word Nibbāna refers to the experience of that; what is 
felt in the heart when it knows the truth, when the heart awakens to the 
Dhamma, what it experiences is Nibbāna – the great peace.
The word Nibbāna, where does that come from? Again, to borrow from 
Ajahn Buddhadāsa’s description, he makes it clear that the word Nibbāna is 
an ordinary household word in Indian languages. The example he gives is, 
‘If you’ve cooked a pot of rice, it’s too hot to eat, so you put it on the side to 
cool down a bit. You let the rice Nibbāna before it’s the right temperature 
to eat.’ It just means ‘cooled down’. It’s not a very refined term; it’s not 
a deeply philosophical or unusual word. It just means ‘cool, cooled down,
chilled out’. 
The Buddha, just like Ajahn Buddhadāsa, liked to make statements that get 
the attention. The Buddha liked to speak in ways that people would notice. 
In his time, spiritual seekers thought in terms of generating tapas. It’s a 
Sanskrit word, also a Pali word, meaning ‘heat’. If you have a lot of spiritual

44
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
power, it’s considered that you have a lot of such ‘heat’, a lot of tapas. 
The more austerity, the more painful practices that you undertake, the 
more tapas, power, you generate. Lord Shiva was considered the ultimate 
tapasin, the supreme spiritually powerful being. That quality of ‘heat’ was 
considered the ultimate strength or goodness. The Buddha, startlingly, 
uses the opposite, ‘coolness’, not ‘heat’, ‘Let’s go for coolness, Nibbāna: 
not heating up, not more heat, less heat, lower it down, turn it down to 
coolness.’ It was a skilful means that he used, in my understanding, to get 
people’s attention. People would thereby be caused to consider, ‘He is not 
talking about what we’re familiar with, he’s talking about something else 
altogether. He’s talking about “cooling down”. What is it that’s cooling 
down?’ It’s the fires of greed, hatred and delusion: lobha, dosa and moha.
•  •  •
Another of the reasons why we need to talk about Nibbāna, along with 
dismissing the idea of it being kind of a super-heaven where Arahants 
and Buddhas go when they pass away, is that many people are put off 
by the concept of Nibbāna as a goal for themselves. On account of the 
conditioning of the mind to see everything in personal terms, based upon 
self-view, people tend to think, ‘I don’t want to go to Nibbāna because 
you can’t take your family with you. If I’m not going to be reborn, what 
about my grandchildren. What about my dog? Will I ever see her again? I

45
BEYOND
don’t want to go to Nibbāna – something like the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven would
be much better!’ 
Many Dhamma teachers like Ajahn Chah, or Ajahn Mun, or Ajahn 
Buddhadāsa, the great teachers of our time, have commented that their 
students would say, ‘I don’t want to go to Nibbāna, it’s a really off-putting 
prospect. There’s no feeling of warmth or happiness there.’ When these 
teachers would talk about Nibbāna, people would say, ‘No thank you. I want 
to go to heaven for a bit, then come back. I plan to make a lot of merit, 
go to heaven, then come back to earth when Sri Ariya Maitreya, the next 
Buddha, comes along. It’ll be really easy to become an Arahant when there’s 
a Buddha in the world and maybe I’ll feel ready for Nibbāna then.’ 
If people said this kind of thing to Luang Por Chah, which they sometimes 
would in all seriousness, he would respond with something like, ‘Not very 
smart.’ It’s also a bit of a gamble. People would also say, ‘I don’t want to 
develop insight now, because if I do that, I might become a stream-enterer, 
and that means only seven more lifetimes but those lives might involve a 
lot of suffering! If instead, I make enough merit I’ll go to heaven and come 
back when Sri Ariya Maitreya is here, then I can hop off the wheel.’ ‘You 
must be a gambler. Those are bad odds. That’s really a long shot. Don’t 
think that way.’ Luang Por Chah would try to change people’s view and ask, 
‘Why do you think Nibbāna is a bad idea? Why do you not want to realize

46
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
that? Why do you think it’s something that is unpleasant? The Buddha said, 
“Nibbāna is the supreme happiness” if he gives it such praise, why are you 
not interested? Do you think the Buddha was wrong?!’ Sometimes the great 
Ajahns would be able to get their message across but sometimes not.
What’s the cause of this hesitancy, this reticence? This is interesting to 
consider. Why the prospect of Nibbāna or the ending of rebirth makes us 
uncomfortable is because of our attachment, it is because of sakkāya-diṭṭhi. 
Attachment to our body, to our personality, our family, our things, our life, 
our home, our pets. In England, oftentimes people are more attached to 
the dog and the cat than they are to the family. This represents sakkāyadiṭṭhi, the attachment to the body and the personality. That feeling of, ‘Ooh, 
I don’t like that idea,’ The Pali word sakkāya-diṭṭhi, literally means, ‘the view 
of the real body, the view of the real person’. Thus, I can believe: ‘I am the 
body, I am the personality, I am a man, I am 67 years old, I am English, I am 
a Theravāda monk.’ These kinds of statements, which are conventionally  
true, we take to be ultimately true. Instead of being a sammuti sacca , a 
conventional truth, we take it to be a paramattha sacca , an absolute truth. 
Because of that mistake, we believe, ‘I am the body, I am the personality’. 
The process of vipassanā, insight meditation, helps us to examine that 
belief. When I breathe in, I take the oxygen in, that which was the air of 
Hertfordshire before is now Ajahn Amaro. The oxygen gets joined to my

47
BEYOND
blood, to my haemoglobin; so that oxygen, it went from being English 
countryside oxygen to being Ajahn Amaro’s body’s oxygen. Did it? Or is it 
just oxygen? At what point did it change from being countryside to being 
human? Then when that oxygen gets bound to carbon and becomes carbon 
dioxide, and gets breathed out, then it stops being human, and becomes 
Hertfordshire countryside, it’s human here while, out there, it’s not... This is 
sammuti sacca. We can say, ‘On my passport, it says: male. My  chromosomes 
are X and Y.’ Technically male, but what makes male-ness is compounded, 
is conditioned. It’s a conventional truth. 
Through the development of the basis of insight, vipassanā-kammaṭṭhāna, 
we investigate the conditioned, contingent, dependent nature of those 
designations. When the citta is able to see through them, when those feelings 
of ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’ are illuminated and seen as empty, transparent, 
then some perspective on those causes for hesitancy comes into being. 
When we look at the teachings and we consider the nature of reality, and we 
take into account that the Buddha said, ‘Nibbāna is the highest happiness,’ 
(M 75.19) and ‘Nibbāna is the supreme Noble Truth,’ (M 140.26) it should 
not be off-putting at all but those habits of I-making and mine-making are 
deeply rooted and tenacious, aren’t they? At the beginning of Chapter Eight 
of the Udāna, there is another particularly significant sutta, the Buddha says:

48
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
There is that sphere, that domain of being, that āyatana, where there is 
no earth, no water, no fire, no wind; no sphere of infinity of space, of 
infinity of consciousness, of nothingness, or even of neither-perceptionnor-non-perception; there, there is neither this world nor the other 
world, neither moon nor sun; this sphere of being, this āyatana I call 
neither a coming nor a going nor a staying still, neither a dying nor a 
reappearance; it has no basis, no evolution, and no support: this, just 
this, is the end of dukkha. (Ud 8.1) 
‘No sun, no moon... no coming, no going, no standing still? What is that? 
How is that? How can that be?’
This is one of the few places where the Buddha talks about the fundamental 
nature of Dhamma itself. To the mind that is attached to the body, the 
personality, to time, to identity and to place, to the mind that says, ‘I am a 
person and I was born, I’m 67 years old and this is my address,’ it’s all very 
threatening. We can feel very intimidated, ‘This is dangerous. I’m going 
to lose everything. Everything that I am is gone. How could that be the 
end of suffering? Everything is wiped out? No moon, no stars, no sun, is 
everything just annihilated?’ It might look that way on first encounter but 
since the Buddha is saying that this is the end of suffering, this implies that 
there is more here than meets the eye. Some other considerations must be 
in play, otherwise it would not make sense.

49
BEYOND
That said, when the Buddha spoke in such ways he was regularly challenged. 
A number of people said, ‘So you’re talking about annihilation. You mean 
that with Nibbāna, at enlightenment, everything is wiped out? This being is 
destroyed?’ In response to such assumptions he once said:
I have been baselessly, vainly, falsely misrepresented as saying that I 
describe the annihilation, the destruction, the extermination of an 
existent being. But that’s not what I teach, and those people who say 
that, they misrepresent me. (M 22.37)
What he’s saying is that the appearance, that we seem to be an independent, 
self-existent being, that’s the mistake. We think that, ‘I was born, therefore 
I will die, I exist in time.’ But he’s saying in this teaching that that sense of 
being an individual, being born, the sense of time passing, these are mere 
appearances. It’s important to understand why, to our ordinary thinking 
mind ‘I am! I’m sitting here! And time is passing. It’s now 7:30. I’m reading 
this and I’m a person.’ To the six senses – eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and 
the thinking mind – time, identity and place all seem to be absolutely real. 
What the Buddha is saying is that, if the mind sees clearly and recognizes, 
‘No! That’s not the whole story. Time is an appearance. Identity is an 
appearance, it’s the way things look. And location, where we are. That’s 
also just an appearance.’ To our thinking mind and to our senses, this is 
mind-blowing, because our no rmal way of thinking doesn’t apply: there

50
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
is no ‘destruction… of an existent being’ because no permanent separate 
being actually exists.
Luang Por Chah liked to challenge people, to make them think and question 
their attachments to self, time, location, causality and conventions. Drawing 
upon the same principle that Ud 8.1 expresses, he would ask, ‘If you can’t 
go forwards, you can’t go backwards and you can’t stand still – where
can you go?’
The only way that the mind can solve this puzzle is to let go. Let go of the 
body, let go of time, let go of place. He also said, ‘The Buddha-Dhamma 
is not to be found in moving forwards, nor in moving backwards, nor in 
standing still. This is the place of non-abiding.’ There’s no abiding place, no 
place to land.
Luang Por Chah offered many good examples. He said, ‘If you look at this 
building, you have the ground floor with the concrete base, that’s a place of 
birth. Then the upper storey where there’s a floor in the room of the kuṭī, 
that’s also a place of birth. In between, between the floor up there and the 
floor down here, in this place, there’s nowhere to stand. This is Nibbāna. 
Where there’s no place to stand.’
What he’s pointing to is that the mind is habituated to having ‘places to 
stand’, we’re looking f or something to ‘be’, some place to abide, something 
to identify with. ‘I am a man’, ‘I am a woman’, ‘I am a monk’, ‘I am

51
BEYOND
English’, ‘I’m American. That’s what I am!’ And he’d say, ‘Let go! Let go
of all those abidings.’ 
When we develop sati-paññā, mindfulness and wisdom, the mind looks 
at its own nature. There’s the realization that the Dhamma is sandiṭṭhiko, 
apparent here and now, akāliko, timeless, time doesn’t apply, ehipassiko, 
encouraging investigation, opanayiko, leading inwards, paccataṃ veditabbo 
viññūhi, to be seen by each wise person for themselves.
If you think about it, place, the physical location of something, only applies 
to rūpa-khandha. For the nāma-khandhas: feeling, perception, saṅkhāra, 
viññāṇa, the mind does not exist any place; the mind is, but place does 
not apply. Where does my mind stop and yours, the reader’s, begin? This 
far? Or that far? ‘Where-ness’, location, doesn’t apply; even if you are 
reading this on a tablet up in the International Space-Station, is your mind 
separate in space from mine? The mind doesn’t have a location. When we 
practise vipassanā meditation, when the mind is watching its activities and 
experiences, then there can be that recognition. I say, ‘I’m experiencing 
sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, thought arising and passing away here,’ but 
when the mind looks closely, ‘here’ doesn’t really apply, mind is non-local, 
it doesn’t exist in a place.
Luang Por Chah’s question is a trick question, because you can’t go 
anywhere, but the mind can let go of you-ness. When the mind is fully awake

52
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
and knows clearly, when it has let go of any kind of grasping, it realizes 
it doesn’t exist any where, it doesn’t have an identity. The mind knows 
those feelings of the body, the memories and the thoughts, it sees those 
aspects of the person, arising and passing, but, and this might be difficult
to understand, the mind which knows the person is not a person.
There’s grasping on a social level, grasping on a physical level and grasping 
on a psychological level. You can let go of some coarse things – like giving 
up going to boxing matches or gambling, coarse destructive things that give 
you a thrill – but even though you have given up those coarse attachments, 
other more subtle kinds of attachment are hard to see, we’re not aware of 
their presence. For example, there’s the feeling of ‘I think’, ‘I remember’, 
‘It’s my life’, ‘I’m happy’, ‘I’m unhappy’, ‘I’m sad’. All those ‘I am’s, ‘This is 
mine’s, seem completely reasonable and ordinary. But then the more the 
vipassanā-kammaṭṭhāna is developed, the more it’s recognized that, ‘That 
“I” feeling is also just another attachment; just as are that “I am” feeling, 
the “I am-ness” or the “mine-ness” of “This is mine, my body, my feeling, 
my memories, my Dhamma book, my computer screen, my responsibility.”’ 
There’s a really interesting teaching in the suttas that I like to quote on this 
subject. It’s called the Khemaka Sutta (S 22.89). Khemaka was an old monk. 
He was very sick, and was approaching his death. His friends, the other 
monks in the monastery, sent a message to him saying, ‘We hear that you’re

53
BEYOND
dying. Have you completed your practice, have you arrived at Arahantship 
yet?’ He’s lying on his deathbed. He’s very ill, so he tells the messenger, ‘Go 
and tell them that I haven’t finished my work yet. I still haven’t reached 
Arahantship.’ The messenger goes back to his friends, then he comes back 
again and says, ‘They ask, in what way have you not finished your work?’ 
He’s dying, but his friends are still pressing him about it, although probably 
they were well-intentioned. The messenger monk, Dāsaka, goes back and 
forth three or four times, the Elders asking further questions, about his 
attachment to the five khandhas and feelings of ‘I am’, until finally he says, 
‘Enough, friend Dāsaka! Why keep running back and forth?’ 
Khemaka rises from his deathbed and goes over to see these friends of his. A 
very interesting dialogue then ensues. He says, ‘Let’s put it this way. It’s like 
a flower. You can smell the fragrance of the flower, but you can’t tell where 
the fragrance comes from. Is it in the petals? Is it from the stalk? Is it from 
the pollen? Is it from the stamens? From the little fine pistils? The nectar? 
Where’s it coming from? You can smell it, but you can’t tell where the 
fragrance is located. In the same way, there’s no attachment to any of the 
five khandhas, to the body, to feeling, to perception, to mental formations, 
even to consciousness, however, this “I am” feeling is still around. But it’s 
not attached to any “thing”, like the fragrance of the flower. So that’s where 
my mind has sustained its attachment.’

54
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
As he was giving that description to his friends, he realized enlightenment 
and became an Arahant. He’s probably the only person who ever became 
enlightened hearing his own Dhamma talk. And also, 60 of his friends 
became Arahants too. It was a very useful exchange; it was good that he got 
off his deathbed to have that dialogue. 
The heart, the citta, is Dhamma, it’s not a person. It knows the attributes 
of the person, the body and feelings, perceptions, arising and passing, but 
it’s not personal. This which knows female and male has no gender; it’s not 
female or male. It’s not tall or short. It doesn’t have an age or colour. This 
which knows doesn’t have a location. 
Sometimes, when people came to see him, the Buddha was asked about the 
nature of the Arahant. On one occasion a young brahmin student called 
Upasīva enquired about what happens to an Arahant when the body 
dies. ‘Do they go to some kind of immortal place where they’re happy 
forever in some kind of super-heaven? Or do they disappear altogether 
forever? What happens?’ Although the Buddha often responded to such 
questions by saying something like, ‘This is the wrong question,’ on this
occasion he said: 
One who has reached the end has no criterion 
by which they can be measured. 
That which can be spoken of is no more.

55
BEYOND
You cannot say they do not exist, 
but when all modes of being, 
all phenomena have been removed, 
all means of speaking have gone too.
     (SN 1075-76) 
Across that border, ordinary concepts and language don’t apply. How can 
you describe a being when there’s no individuality, no time, no place, 
no causality, no language and no number? Because language is all about 
perception, saññā. it’s all about seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. 
We have an animal body, it’s located in this spot, so all of our language 
and our thoughts are based on the perceptions, on saññā arising from the 
body. So, how do you describe a universe beyond saññā? The words run out. 
Ajahn Buddhadāsa described it as, ‘The thinking mind falls flat.’ When the 
conceptual mind meets the Dhamma, it collapses, it lacks the dimensions 
to accommodate it.
Arahantship is the fulfilment of human potential, the highest spiritual 
achievement, so it was understandable that people (like young Upasīva) 
asked the Buddha about what happens when an Arahant passes away – 
assuming that they must ‘go somewhere’, probably really, really pleasant, 
after all they have achieved ‘sainthood’, perfection... Throughout his life, 
notwithstanding these comments to Upasīva, the Buddha hardly spoke

56
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
about this domain. He repeatedly described the path to ending dukkha and 
rebirth, to realizing Arahantship, but when people said, ‘What happens 
when an enlightened being dies, where do they go?’ he would dismantle 
the question: ‘“Where” does not apply. “They” does not apply. “Go” does 
not apply. “Time”, and therefore the future, does not apply. No words or 
concepts at all can apply.’ As the Buddha put it in one teaching: ‘Whatever 
you conceive it to be, the truth is necessarily other than that’ – ‘Yena yena 
hi maññanti tato taṃ hoti aññathā’ti’  (M 113.28).
The words and concepts run out, so nothing can be spoken of. Like he 
said to Upasīva, ‘One who has reached the end has no criterion by which 
they can be measured.’ There’s no way you can measure that. How can 
you describe something without time or causality, without space, without 
identity, without number or language? Words can’t apply, because the 
words are crafted from and for the world of seeing, hearing, smelling, 
tasting, touching, for time and three-dimensional space, they borrow their 
substance from that. 
Ancient India was a land of accomplished philosophers, experts with 
sophisticated vocabularies, so one might think that maybe the Buddha 
could have come up with some apposite, perfectly crafted philosophical 
terms to describe what life is like on the other side of that border. However, 
he was resolute and clear on this: even to talk about ‘a border’ is giving the

57
BEYOND
wrong signals. The mind conditioned by birth wants to create a person, 
to create a place and a time, and he realized, even though he would be 
misunderstood, it was better to speak in terms of the reality of knowable 
experience here and now, to focus on describing the Path to the End of 
Suffering, and leave that other aspect undeclared. So that’s what he did, the 
whole of his teaching career. The most he ever said, when he was talking 
about Dabba Mallaputta, was:
There is no pointing to the bourn
Of those perfectly released,
Who have crossed the flood
Of bondage to sense desires
And attained unshakeable bliss.
  (Ud 8.10, John D. Ireland trans.)
That’s all you get. There is no more than that.
•  •  •
I feel that’s one of the reasons why we need to talk about Nibbāna – because 
we think of it as something ‘I’ will be experiencing, or ‘I’ can experience 
here and now, or ‘I’ will be experiencing in the future, and it will be some 
special place, for ‘me’. But the teachings are pointing to a very different 
dimension, and as long as we squeeze that into the form of ‘my life’, ‘my 
mind’ ‘me passing through time’, there’s always going to be a distortion.

58
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
We won’t be seeing the teachings clearly or understanding what is being 
said. In Luang Por Chah’s and Ajahn Buddhadāsa’s teachings, they would 
talk about Nibbāna not as just some sort of remote distant goal, off in the 
future, but as something much closer to home. 
In Ajahn Buddhadāsa’s book, he has in bold print, strong black print, 
‘Nibbāna has got nothing to do with death.’ Again people often say ‘Entered 
Nibbāna’, as when an Arahant dies, but actually in the teachings, Nibbāna is 
when the mind is enlightened. When it reaches enlightenment, right there 
is the experience of Nibbāna. It’s not when the body dies but when the 
heart is free of greed, hatred and delusion; then, that felt sense of the mind 
is peacefulness, Nibbāna. When Ajahn Chah was asked to define Nibbāna, 
he described it in a very simple way. He said, ‘The reality of non-grasping is 
Nibbāna.’ Very simple. Not anything to do with heaven or death – Nibbāna 
is non-grasping.
We all know the experience of grasping. We know that feeling: ‘I like’, 
‘This is mine’, ‘I hate this’, ‘This is good’, ‘This is awful’, ‘This is my space’. 
We know the feeling of grasping, right? The reality of non-grasping, what 
that means is, right now, when the mind lets go of anything that’s being 
grasped, letting that go, that’s the cooling down, that’s letting go. It’s 
letting the heart cool down. Grasping is the state of heat and tension, and 
letting go, when the heart lets go of grasping, right here is Nibbāna. It’s not

59
BEYOND
a loud explosion. You don’t get rainbows and devas with trumpets saying, 
‘Hurray, well done!’ It’s completely ordinary, a quiet simplicity. You can say 
it’s being perfectly normal at last. 
The English word ‘normal’ is not exciting, right? It’s normal. ‘It’s just a 
normal Tuesday evening,’ it means it’s nothing special, there’s no need 
to pay any attention, it doesn’t have much value. In the Thai language, if 
you look at the word tammadah, meaning ‘normal’, ‘ordinary’ it’s got the 
syllable dhamm- in it, that’s the clue. The word tammadah comes from the 
Pali word dhammatā meaning ‘of the nature of Dhamma’.
Hidden in the ordinary is the Dhamma itself. Hidden in the ordinary is the 
utterly extraordinary. Hidden in the normal, is ‘the Norm’, which is a word 
TW Rhys Davids used to render ‘the Dhamma’, in some translations. 
We overlook peace. When the peace of mind is here, we often don’t 
notice it. When the heart relaxes and we stop grasping, we look for the 
next interesting thing. The next thing to worry about, the next thing 
to get excited about, the next thing to have an opinion about. As Ajahn 
Sumedho would often say, ‘Peace is boring.’ He’d point out, ‘If you printed 
a newspaper with, “Ajahn Sumedho breathed in and then he breathed 
out,” if they put that on the cover of the Daily Mirror, you wouldn’t 
sell very many copies. But if it read, “Ajahn Sumedho Runs Away With 
Sixteen-Year-Old Girl”, you’d sell a lot of copies.’ That’s exciting news.

60
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
‘Terrible! Let me see!’ But, ‘Ajahn Sumedho breathes...’ big deal, so what? 
Peace is boring, it’s not exciting. Therefore the attention overlooks it, 
ignores it. 
If we pick up something and we grasp it, there’s a tension, our arm starts 
shaking. There’s a vibration, a tightness. Then to stop grasping, we don’t 
have to throw it away, we just relax the grip. We’re still holding it, but 
we’re not grasping it, there’s no tension, there’s no dukkha. We can explore 
that: ‘Now there’s tension; and now, I relax.’ After the tensing has stopped, 
for about two or three seconds, three or four seconds, there is a conscious 
appreciation of ease, ‘Ahh! Thank goodness that’s over.’ How long does that 
‘Ahh’ last? Three seconds? Maybe four, maximum? Then, the mind starts to 
seek: ‘OK, what else is going on?’ Does this sound familiar? 
That’s how we are, because peace is boring. When it’s a contrast to 
stress it’s noticeable and consciously appreciated ‘Ahh! Thank goodness 
that’s over!’ Like if you’ve been working around your home, and you’ve 
been tidying things up, you’ve been doing the dishes, finishing up some 
correspondence, and you get everything done and you put it away, you sit 
down on a chair, ‘Ahh, phew!’ You’ve finally got all those letters written 
or you’ve got the dishes done, so you sit down and ‘Ahh’ and one… two… 
three… ‘So, what else is there to do? I’m sure I’m supposed to be doing
something… Oh yes!’

61
BEYOND
Weirdly we can feel relieved when we remember the other duties that we 
have. We remember something we’re supposed to be worrying about. It’s 
another problem, but you’re glad to have the problem, because we feel 
more unsettled with that empty space than we do with having a thing to 
exist in relation to. That’s like the space between the two floors that Luang 
Por Chah was talking about. That empty space, non-abiding, the ego doesn’t 
know what to do with that, we can’t stand there, there isn’t anything to take 
hold of, so we think that that ‘nothing’ must somehow be bad or worthless. 
That space, right there, is Nibbāna. Right there, the Dhamma is apparent. 
But we overlook it because it’s not a thing, it doesn’t grab our attention, it’s 
not interesting. A lot of the training, of the practice, and why we need to 
talk about Nibbāna, is that although Nibbāna is accessible, here and now, we 
don’t see it. The Dhamma is available, here and now, but we keep missing 
it, because we get interested in other things. ‘What’s that over there?’ or, ‘I 
should be doing this instead.’ Our attention is taken up by seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, touching, thinking, remembering, planning, social media, 
checking our phone, ‘How many messages have I got, any more followers 
on Instagram? Any less followers on Instagram? What’s happening on 
TikTok?’ The practice then becomes how to realize Nibbāna. How to bring 
the mind to notice the peace that’s there when the grasping stops, and not 
to follow that impulse towards distraction, away from silence and space.

62
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Certainly, just relaxing the hand from its grasp ing, for a moment, is not 
Arahantship, the irreversible ending of suffering. But it is what they call 
tadaṅga-Nibbāna, or momentary Nibbāna. Again, Ajahn Buddhadāsa spoke 
about this quite often. In that moment, to some degree, there is the flavour 
of Nibbāna, the taste of Nibbāna. There’s a quality of purity, simplicity, a 
quiet normality. Then the trick, or the skill, that needs to be developed 
in order to sustain and extend that realization of Nibbāna, is to keep the 
attention on that space. When the mind goes, ‘What about…?’ That, right 
there, that’s the urge for birth, that’s the mind looking for a rebirth. If you 
want to understand rebirth, it’s right there! ‘I should be doing something, 
I should be worrying about something, I must…!’ That’s the seed of rebirth. 
If that is recognized and known as just another mental formation, another 
saṅkhāra, then we let it go, and allow the attention stay with the silence, 
space, that peacefulness that remains; and allowing that agitation end, the 
mind can open up, can realize that quality of peacefulness.
•  •  •
When the Buddha spoke about the development of the Four Noble Truths, the 
First Noble Truth is dukkha, suffering, it needs to be apprehended that there 
is dukkha. The Second Noble Truth is dukkha-samudaya, craving, it needs to be 
let go of. The Third Noble Truth is dukkha-nirodha, the cessation of suffering, 
it needs to be realized. When the dukkha stops, we need to realize that. As has

63
BEYOND
been said here, what happens when the dukkha stops is that we notice it for 
two or three seconds, and then it’s gone, we don’t ‘realize’ it, we just move 
onto the next thing to be interested in or to be worried or irritated about.
Saying ‘it needs to be realized’, is bringing the attention to the absence 
of dukkha, the absence of stress. Let the heart really know that. Readers 
who are familiar with Ajahn Sumedho’s books, or who have listened 
to his teachings, will know he talks about this a lot. This is in a way the 
most important of the Four Noble Truths, the third one, because the 
others are much more visible, tangible, you can see them, you can touch 
them, you can feel them. But recognizing space, noticing space, noticing 
silence, noticing peace, that actually takes a lot of effort, all the time.
It’s a continuous practice.
We’ve got to go against our habits – the habits of the senses, of the eye, 
ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. Because the senses are all geared towards 
interesting things; what’s exciting, what’s dangerous, what’s frightening, 
what’s a problem. It takes a special kind of effort to notice space, to notice 
silence, and stillness, peacefulness. If the mind is trained to do that, then 
that space, that silence, that peace – which initially seemed to be normal, 
nothing, nothing very much – there’s a kind of flowering, it comes alive. It 
takes on a quality of liveliness. The heart awakens to, ‘Oh! There’s no thing 
here! It’s no thing, and yet very much!’

64
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
If you’re looking for somebody and you go into a room and see, ‘They are 
not here, OK, carry on looking in the next room.’ That space in the room 
is blank, an absence of the person you’re looking for. If, instead of that, 
you come into the room, ‘They are not here, OK, stop. Pay attention.’ Let 
yourself be still. Listen to the silence. Feel the space. Notice the stillness, 
the peacefulness, ‘Oh, This is really nice.’ You had been seeing it as a mere 
absence of the thing you were looking for, but actually, the presence, the 
fullness of the Dhamma was ever-present. What’s there in the room is the 
Dhamma itself, that we overlook. There is the quality of peace, of purity, 
of stillness. It’s always here but we miss it, we overlook it. If we take these 
moments to stop, to be still and notice the space, it blossoms like a flower 
opening. The space comes alive with presence.
To develop the realization of Nibbāna, to help your heart to incline towards 
Nibbāna, take the opportunity to notice space, stillness, silence. It’s always 
here, even in the midst of noise and activity. It can’t go anywhere else, it’s 
always here. Then we find that Nibbāna is everywhere. 
Nibbāna is not just some sort of special heaven that Arahants go to, but 
rather, it’s the peace of our own mind. It’s the peace that is here when 
the grasping and the identification stop. The peace that is here when the 
mind is not distracted by the superficial, but opens to the presence of the 
reality of this moment. It is the experience of the Unconditioned that is

65
BEYOND
always available, just behind appearances, the stillness which is behind all 
movement, the silence that is within all sound, the space that surrounds 
and permeates all forms. The heart is able to realize and awaken to Nibbāna 
right here and right now. Not just when you’ve finished this chapter, or 
when you switch off the iPad and close your eyes, or when you go to sit in a 
quiet place. It’s ever present. It’s sandiṭṭhiko, apparent here and now.

Suchness and the Square Root of Minus One
A few years back, in the USA, a laywoman friend of Abhayagiri Monastery 
became seriously ill. She’d been sick for a while, and when her health 
seemed to be worsening, I decided to travel cross-country to see her. 
I wanted to lend moral support and help her and her family. She was in 
hospital in a very grave condition, with tubes inserted into her arms and 
down her throat. She was lying in bed and could move only her hands a 
bit. She couldn’t speak. Hers was a dire and delicate condition, her body in 
a state of extreme sickness. Around the hospital I saw many other people 
also experiencing various extremes of physical stress and disease of one 
kind or another.
After a couple of days, I flew back to California in time for a planned visit to 
the local Waldorf School. I went from the hospital and the realm of sickness 
and ageing to a school and the realm of youth and vital activity. Kids were 
bouncing around with high-octane energy, enthusiasm and exuberance 
while their teachers worked to contain, protect, and guide their pupils’ 
young minds and bodies to develop.

68
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Noticing this juxtaposition, I reflected on the different qualities it takes 
to support and hold together a human life. Whether we’re old and sick or 
youthful and energetic – or even temporarily able-bodied and seemingly 
independent as a competent adult – a staggering, hypercomplex array of 
different forces and supports are required to keep us healthy and alive. 
When you consider it, we are an amazingly intricate and fragile system. An 
incredible number of conditions have to be lined up in order for our life to 
be sustained. 
It’s hardly surprising then that things don’t work perfectly all the time – 
that our emotions go awry, or that the pancreas starts to cave in, or that 
a parent loses their grip, or that the white blood cell count starts ramping 
up. From before birth, all the way to the last breath, and even as the dead 
body is decomposing, life is a well-ordered process of growth and decay, 
but that ordering might be quite unpredictable and unwanted by us, at the 
conscious human level.
Opening our mind to this fact changes our view of things. We see that it’s 
a kind of hubris to look on our life with the idea that we’ve got the right to 
be comfortable and happy and healthy, and wealthy enough to be free to do 
whatever we choose for all of our days. That’s an absurdity; it’s impossible. 
From the time of our birth through our childhood and adolescence, we’re 
not in any kind of state of full control. There’s the little bit of adult life

69
BEYOND
when most of us have a degree of competence and independence, but that 
doesn’t last too long before things start waning. The eyes and ears begin to 
go, the thinking declines, bodily vitality lessens. The body goes its natural 
way, degenerating, because its functions can’t all stay coordinated for long. 
When we look at it closely, we realize, ‘Of course, how could it be otherwise?’
If we don’t reflect on this, we find ourselves being startled or shocked when 
something goes ‘wrong’: when we injure a limb, get a headache or a cold, or 
someone has a gripe against us. ‘Oh, how can this be?! This isn’t fair. This 
isn’t right! It shouldn’t be this way!’ It’s crazy, really, that we should ever 
think like this.
This is why the Buddha encouraged the reflections on old age, sickness, and 
death. After our meditation period at the monastery, we often recite the 
‘Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection’:
I am of the nature to age;
I am of the nature to sicken;
I am of the nature to die; 
All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will 
become separated from me;
I am the owner of my karma, heir to my karma, born of my karma, 
related to my kamma, abide supported by my karma, whatever karma I 
shall do, for good or for ill, of that I will be the heir. 
(A 5.57)

70
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Sometimes when people hear this chant, they think, ‘Wow, that’s really 
depressing. These Buddhists must really like to be miserable. Life is bad 
enough already. Why make ourselves even more glum?’ But as long as we 
are influenced by a negative view of sickness, ageing, and death – as long 
as we buy into that way of thinking – then we’re continually in a state of 
stress and difficulty.
What we’re really doing with these reflections is waking the mind up to 
get with the program. Ageing, sickness, death: this is the deal we sign up 
for when we’re born. It’s the natural order of things. Rather than getting 
depressed, when we see that this is the way it is, this is how things are 
supposed to be in the natural order of life, then we slowly gain a feeling of 
greater independence. 
We’re encouraging ourselves to recognize, ‘Well, life has always been this 
way. We’ve got to interact with all sorts of people, we’ve got to live in 
varieties of climates and weather, we’ve got a body that feels both pleasure 
and pain. Of course there are going to be obstructions and difficulties and 
things that we don’t want or choose. How could it be otherwise?’ Even 
just stopping and thinking about this for a moment, the true nature of life 
becomes extremely obvious.
My visit to the hospital reminded me that the body is an intricate and 
massively complex organic system, an integrated ecosystem. In fact, to

71
BEYOND
bacteria and micr obes and viruses, we’re a home and a food source. ‘Oh, 
look,’ they say. ‘Let’s distract the antibodies for a while and sneak in the 
back door, quick, before she takes some antibiotics. Make merry! Multiply!’ 
The side effect for us, the host, may be illness or pain, but as far as the little 
critters are concerned, it’s more likely to be the experience of, ‘Hey,  this 
place is great!’ Within our bodies, whole microscopic civilisations hatch, 
grow, blossom, reach their peak, and then collapse, just like our human 
society-scale empires. We may call it having a cold or an infection, but on 
the bacterial level, an entire aeon is arising and passing away.
So these reflections – ‘I am of the nature to age, I am of the nature to sicken, 
I am of the nature to die; all that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become 
otherwise’ and so on – are all pointing us to this simple reality. What we 
think of as an individual being, ‘me’, is really just a sub-ecosystem in a larger 
complex of ecosystems that’s in a constant state of change. Sometimes the 
consciousness at our human level is going to be comfortable, sometimes 
uncomfortable. How could it be otherwise? 
•  •  •
It’s because of ignorance, because of ‘wrong view’ or seeing things 
incorrectly, that we get carried away by false impressions of independence 
and permanence and stability. It’s because of delusion that we believe we 
have the right to be comfortable, or not to be opposed, or to be happy, to be

72
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
well-off or not to experience unlikeable objects. We take it all personally. 
It’s ridiculous, really. Reflecting on this in a clear and systematic way serves 
to illuminate our habits of self-view or personality-view ( sakkāya-diṭṭhi in 
Pali). The belief that ‘I am the body, I am the personality, this is me, this is 
who I am’ all derives from self-view. 
But then we may ask, ‘If I am not the body, then who is it that gets sick? 
Who is it that’s separated from the loved? Who is the recipient of the 
results of good and bad action?’ This is still self-view. If there’s no selfview, then there’s simply the experience of sickness in the body. We take 
some medicine, rest the body, do what’s necessary, but it’s not who and 
what we are. If someone says to us, ‘This body is beautiful or ugly, this 
body is old or young, this body is heavy or light, this body is female or 
male,’ so what? Taking pride in being attractive, being a certain age, or 
being a certain gender is totally based on self-view. When we let go of selfview, when the mind abandons the ignorant perception ‘ I am the body, I 
am the personality, I am the mind’ and that’s seen through as the delusion 
that it is, then there’s a tremendous relief. This sort of reflection helps to 
arouse brightness and clarity of the heart, which illuminates and reveals 
our ignorant views and deluded attitudes. 
According to the ultimate truth, we’re not the body, not the personality, 
not the mind. As the old TV lawyer Perry Mason would say, ‘It’s merely

73
BEYOND
circumstantial evidence.’ Our body, our personality, our Social Security 
number and birth certificate are merely circumstantial evidence. There’s 
no absolute proof of a ‘self’ whatsoever. There are just bits of evidence 
woven together based on false assumptions. 
When we hear these kinds of Dhamma teachings, we may say, ‘Yeah, right. 
Although I’m definitely a man. I’m definitely a monk.’ But that’s self-view. 
Ultimately, there aren’t any men or women, no monastics or laypeople, 
nobody who’s tall or short, nobody who’s sick or healthy. This isn’t just an 
assertion I am proclaiming. It’s something for all of us to investigate for 
ourselves. I can ask, ‘Which part of me is male?’ Yes, I can study the level 
of the chromosomes to find the male chromosome, but are the adenine, 
guanine, cytosine and thymine, which are all woven together in the little 
spirals of DNA that make up that male chromosome… are they male? What 
about the carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, phosphorus, sulphur, potassium 
or sodium atoms? Are they male? Is my body strictly made of masculine 
protons, neutrons, and electrons? That view is absurd, totally ridiculous. 
Male or female is a conventional designation for a body that begins 
somewhere along the line, but at the root, the body is all just subatomic 
particles buzzing around, woven together with the energy of the universe. 
That’s all. There’s no ultimate male or female, monastic or layperson, good 
or bad, beautiful or ugly. There is no substantial person there.

74
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Applying these kinds of reflections helps to illumin ate the very clear and 
definite feeling that arises in us: ‘Wait! I am a person!’ It’s a very convincing 
feeling, but when we look closely, we can notice how it arises, does its thing, 
and ceases. It’s a transient phenomenon. Next, the question may arise, 
‘What is it that knows this feeling?’ Again, we use the power of investigation 
of our experience to look at our assumptions, our habitual ways of viewing 
things. We apply and develop insight meditation, or vipassanā, the practice 
of looking deeply and letting the wisdom faculty open everything up so 
that we can take a look inside. 
The physical body is the coarsest level of identification, but we can 
get subtler and subtler, examining our perceptions and thoughts and 
assumptions and attitudes. We may think, ‘OK, maybe I am not the body. 
Maybe that was just a foolish delusion I was labouring under. What I really 
am is pure awareness. I’m the one who knows, the clear awareness that 
illuminates all conditions. Yeah, that’s what I am!’ That thought may be an 
advance over believing ‘I am a person’ but it’s still an ‘I am’. The mind is 
taking hold of a concept and buying into it. It’s ‘taking birth’, even though 
it’s in a more expansive or non-personal way: ‘ I am the energy of the 
universe, and my essential nature is an intricate, symmetrical, organic web 
stretching from the subatomic realms into 196,884 different dimensions.’ 
Even when it’s woven into a mind-boggling concept like this, it’s still selfview. It still generates the illusion of individual existence.

75
BEYOND
This is why the Buddha encouraged us to examine the experience of 
‘reality’ through the teaching on anattā. It is both a brilliant and a practical 
approach. Even when we use ‘I am’ language in a would-be transcendent 
or liberating way, it’s so easy for ignorant forms of ‘I am’ to grab hold and 
take over. The transcendent ‘I’ can be co-opted in subtle, almost invisible 
forms. So the teaching on anattā continually points the heart towards 
relinquishing the view of ‘self’. As the Buddha said, ‘Whatever you conceive 
it to be, the reality is always other than that.’ Whatever we conceive the self 
to be, even if we conceive our ‘true self’ to be an intricate matrix of 196,884 
dimensions of universal energy, the reality is always other than that. Any 
kind of construct, any kind of concept, any kind of idea, the Buddha said, 
is not self. The Dhamma is always asaṅkhata, unconditioned: beyond form, 
beyond construction. Therefore, anything that’s compounded or formed 
can’t truly represent the ultimate truth, the transcendent reality, no matter 
how vast or all-encompassing it might seem to be.
The Buddha’s teaching on anattā is not intended as a metaphysical 
statement. It’s not a philosophy or belief of ‘I don’t exist’ or ‘there is no 
self’. What it’s saying is meant to be taken on a practical level: all that we 
can conceive, all that we can perceive or name, that’s not who or what 
we are. The teaching on anattā is always pointing us towards letting go, 
relinquishment, abandonment, and non-identification with any form or

76
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
any structure. It’s a very simple process. If we take it to heart and cultivate 
non-identification with the body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations 
and consciousness, then reality is revealed. When we let go of what we’re 
not, what is real, the Dhamma, will become apparent. That’s all it takes! 
But as soon as we try to conceive of that truth, then we lose it. As soon as we 
try to conceptualize the Dhamma as some sort of mental image of Ultimate 
Reality, then we’re born, alienated, and caught in a trap once again. Resting 
in the attitude of non-grasping, is really frustrating to the thinking mind. 
We like to define what we are: ‘I am a man, a woman, a monk, a layperson, 
old, young, useless, better’. Or on a more subtle level, the desire mind, the 
grasping mind, wants to jump back to the thought, ‘I am pure awareness, I 
am the one who knows, I am the wisdom mind, I’m the pure heart.’ I am this, 
I am that. Then we’re caught up, carried away, swept along on the wave of 
becoming once again. The desire mind likes those ‘I am’s even though they 
create alienation and insecurity, imbalance and discontent. They’re the 
devil that we know, so that’s where the mind likes to go. 
It takes a lot of courage and resilience to train the mind to rest in the space 
of non-grasping, non-becoming, relinquishment. But if we allow it, then 
we find an ease, spaciousness and completeness that can never be found 
through the ‘I am’s. When we apply strength and resolution not to allow 
the heart to be swept into becoming, when we let the wave of grasping 
pass, there’s a tremendous quality of relief.

77
BEYOND
So much of spiritual practice is training the heart to be at ease with 
undefinability and the unapprehendable. It’s difficult to do, but if we don’t 
train the heart to rest as that undefined quality, then we will fall into the 
habit of looking for another thing to become, another project to absorb 
into, another place to go to, another future to be born into, another thing 
to get rid of or to acquire. The mind can even make that into a cause for our 
spiritual practice: to become more concentrated, to write a new Dhamma 
book, to develop more insight. But when the mind grabs hold of those 
thoughts, it obscures the fact, that in the moment, we are simply caught in 
becoming and are thus totally missing the reality here, now.
•  •  •
When the Buddha talked about his own nature, when he referred to himself, 
he used the word tathāgata, The One Who Is Thus Come, Thus Gone. This 
term can be broken up as either tath-āgata (‘one who has arrived at suchness, 
thusness’) or tathā-gata (‘one who has gone to suchness, thusness’) – the 
Pali word for ‘suchness’ being tathatā. Its meaning is ambiguous, unclear. 
Does tathāgata mean ‘totally here’, or is it ‘totally gone’? And what do 
those words mean? It’s a brilliant symbol, because thusness/suchness is 
a definite ‘something’, but it’s more than a thing. And, as for the nature 
of the Tathāgata, is it come? Is it gone? Is it here? Is it there? There’s an 
undefined-ness, an edgelessness, an unlocatedness to it – it is ‘profound, 
immeasurable, unfathomable like the great ocean’ (M 72.20).

78
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
In a couple of scriptural passages (S 22.86 & S 44.2), one of the Buddha’s 
monks, Anurādha, is asked by some brahmins, ‘What does your teacher say 
happens to an enlightened being at the death of the body? Do they exist? 
Do they not exist? Do they both exist and not exist? Do they neither exist 
nor not exist?’ Anurādha replies that the Tathāgata describes the nature 
of an enlightened one after the death of the body as something other than 
those four possibilities. The brahmins think he must be either very stupid or 
newly ordained, because they regard that as no valid answer at all. Anurādha 
then returns to the Buddha and asks, ‘Did I answer in the right way?’ 
The Buddha qualifies his response, saying, ‘Anurādha, can you say that the 
Tathāgata is the five khandhas: form, feeling, perception, mental formations, 
consciousness?’ 
‘No, venerable sir.’
‘Can you say that the Tathāgata is not the five khandhas?’
‘No, venerable sir.’
‘Can you say that the Tathāgata is in the five khandhas?’
‘No, venerable sir.’
‘Can you say that the Tathāgata is apart from the five khandhas?’
‘No, venerable sir.’
‘Can you say that the Tathāgata has the five khandhas?’

79
BEYOND
‘No, venerable sir.’
‘Can you say that the Tathāgata does not have the five khandhas?’
‘No, venerable sir, you cannot say that.’
Eventually the Buddha closes with, ‘What I teach, both now and formerly, is 
dukkha and the ending of dukkha.’
This dialogue establishes that the nature of the Tathāgata is not definable 
according to any of those three categories – being/not-being, inside/
outside, having/not-having. It is as if the Buddha is stating: ‘So, Anurādha, 
even when standing right here before you, the Tathāgata is completely 
unapprehendable, how could anything valid be said of an enlightened being 
after the passing away of the body?’ All words fall flat at that boundary. We 
can’t name it, we can’t say anything about it. It’s literally mind-boggling! 
We might think that the Buddha is resorting to sophistry, trying to be 
clever and outsmart everybody else. On the contrary, these are serious 
and useful questions to contemplate. What is the nature of our own being 
or the ultimate nature of reality? What is the meaning of tathāgata, that 
which is thus-come, thus-gone? How do we understand the Buddha’s 
statement that, even though the Tathāgata may be right here before us, 
he can’t be defined in terms of the conditioned, the formed, or the born? 
These questions are frustrating to the thinking mind, so we have to let the 
heart open up instead. That’s a combination fundamental to the practice:

80
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
allowing the thinking mind to say, ‘I’m out of my depth; I give up!’ so that 
the heart can awaken and know the quality of suchness. 
It’s important to recognize that just because something is inconceivable, 
unimaginable or doesn’t make sense to the thinking mind, doesn’t mean 
it’s not real. As Luang Por Paññavaḍḍho put it: ‘The Dhamma is real but it 
doesn’t exist; the five khandhas exist but they’re not real.’ 
A while ago, I was contemplating something similar in the realm of 
mathematics: the square root of minus one. Those who can still remember 
their high school mathematics may recall that the square root of minus one 
does not exist in conceptual, ordinary, three-dimensional reality. There are 
no two numbers that can be multiplied together to get minus one. But a few 
hundred years ago, some mathematician (Rafael Bombellini, in 1572) asked 
the question, ‘What if there was a square root of minus one? How would 
such a number behave if I ran a few equations with it, carrying out different 
operations?’ Well, it turned out that even though the square root of minus 
one doesn’t actually ‘exist’, various qualities in nature still depend on it. 
For example, as I understand it, early on in their development the HewlettPackard company patented something called a ‘phase-shift oscillator’, 
which is used in certain types of circuits. The circuit design of the phaseshift oscillator depends on the presence of the square root of minus one 
– something that doesn’t exist in ordinary reality – in order to function.

81
BEYOND
Hewlett-Packard’s huge fortune was built in part on a quality that doesn’t 
exist. It’s pretty mysterious but also pretty tangible. This is not just a weird 
factoid. Anybody involved in electronic engineering can attest to its truth: 
there are certain circuits that depend upon the square root of minus one. 
Even though the square root of minus one can’t truly exist in nature, it 
produces real effects. 1
This example struck me as being quite similar to the unapprehendability 
of the Tathāgata. There or not there? Real or not real? If we imagine 
ourselves standing face to face with the Buddha, the Tathāgata is totally 
present but the Tathāgata is also untraceable, unfathomable, ungraspable, 
as mentioned here in the dialogue with Anurādha (as well as at M 22.36 
and M 72.20). When we drop habitual patterns of thinking, let go of the 
need for rational definitions, stop casting the world into our preferred and 
unconscious biases, then the heart opens up and that quality of suchness 
can truly be known. The Tathāgata-nature can be apprehended, even 
though the thinking mind can’t conceive it. 
Even though these may sound like abstruse concepts, letting go of our 
habitual views is something that we can do. Whether they are views about 
ageing, sickness and death of the body, about being independent and in 
1. See, for example, An Imaginary Tale – The Story of the Square Root of Minus One , §5.6 ‘A Famous Circuit 
that Works Because of √-1’, by Paul J. Nahin, Princeton University Press, 1998 & 2007, pp 137-141.

82
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
control, or about the nature of our true ‘self’, we can let go of the conceptions 
of the thinking mind. The result will be an immense peacefulness, beauty, 
clarity and simplicity that we can come to know as the very nature of the 
heart. This knowing is possible for all of us. This opportunity for awakening 
is always here.
•  •  •
Monster Lie Algebra
Excited dithyrambs in the halls of Mathematica, in the parlours of those 
who delve into the nature of it all: Sophus Lie, a Norwegian, gave some 
groups his name – symmetries that scintillated down the years until The 
Monster was discovered; an Exceptional Symmetry Object. 2 
One day Dr. McKay, a devotee of ‘group theory’, chancing upon a paper 
from the other world of ‘number’, found to his amazement the dimensions 
of The Monster – 196,884 to be precise – was but a single digit off from a 
number that was featured in the alien work right in his hand. How could 
this be? Same number (almost) but from a separate region – unrelated, 
unbeknownst to one another.
Conway called this connection between number theory and The Monster 
by the comely name of ‘Moonshine’. ‘The stuff we were getting was not 
2. ESO ‘Symmetry and the Monster, ’ p 1; ‘Symmetry and the Monster: The Story of One of the 
Greatest Quests of Mathematics’ by Mark Ronan; Oxford University Press, 2007

83
BEYOND
supported by logical argument – and it seemed almost illicit … Something 
shining by reflected light, like the Moon. There may be a more primary 
source of illumination yet to be discovered.’ 3 
And lo – ‘Borcherds used the crystalline structure of the 26-dimensional 
Lorentzian lattice in creating the Monster Lie algebra.’ In his ‘Monstrous 
Moonshine’ he ‘… creates a structure by quantizing a string moving in 
space-time, showing that “… it turns out to be non-zero only if spacetime is 26-dimensional.” If string theory needs 26 dimensions, as 
opposed to ten, then The Monster may indeed be built into the structure
of the Universe.’4 
Which begs the question: ‘Is The Monster, this gigantic snowflake of 
multitudinous dimensions, an authentic image of the Dhamma – a portrait 
of the Truth behind the world? Is this  mahā-ratana , this sparkling device, 
the spoken name of that which is unnamable?’
•  •  •
I walk the path. Early manzanita flowers hang in rosy bunches. I raise the 
question: ‘Is The Monster a valid incarnation that represents the heart 
of living Dhamma? Is this really a model in the conceptual world of the 
ordering, integrative principle, the matrical patterning of all things?’
3. ibid, p 2
4. ibid, p 225

84
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
The image that springs forth in response is clear, relieving, disappointing 
and surprising: the egoist who would crack the secret of the Universe – 
break the code of the siṃsapa forest – he lost out.
For in that sacred moment, beyond all doubt, the heart knew: This ESO is 
but the finest little shaving of a fingernail of The Way Things Are. Reality, 
the Truth, is so far beyond even the most intricate, multi-dimensional of 
conceivings, there can be only stillness, a blessed hush in response.
To the claim, the monstrous lie, that this hyper-complex algebra might be 
the very key that unlocks The Secret, the fabled sage, Kai Lung, has said: 
‘When the earth-worm boasts of its elegant wings, the eagle can afford to 
be silent.’
Abhayagiri, January the 27 th, 2008

Unshakeable Well-Being:
Is the Buddhist Concept
of Enlightenment a Meaningful
Possibility in the Current Age?
I am delighted to be here today in Amsterdam, sharing this time with so 
many of you, meeting many people for the first time and reconnecting 
with old friends, continuing to enjoy the meeting of the worlds of academic 
psychology and Buddhist meditation, and all their attendant branches. 
The theme for this session is ‘Unshakeable Well-Being: Is the Buddhist 
Concept of Enlightenment a Meaningful Possibility in the Current Age?’
First of all, I should lodge the caveat that even though the theme of this 
session includes the word ‘enlightenment’, I make no claims to having 
realized enlightenment myself. Please don’t consider that I am speaking 
from that kind of exalted spiritual position, but rather as a spiritual friend 
and companion in life with all of you.
In terms of rendering the idea of enlightenment in a language that we can 
understand, or is meaningful to us in this current age, I’ve picked the words 
‘Unshakeable Well-Being’. Also, like several other speakers, I am old-school

88
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
... so, no PowerPoint. Whether or not one employs advanced technology, 
anything that is meaningful to us arrives through our own consciousness, 
our own mind. The learning comes from our side. I can sit here, I can 
speak, I can use words to express various ideas, but whether anyone learns 
anything is really up to your own interest and engagement. It is dependent 
on the receptive awareness of your own hearts and minds. 
*   *   *
I thought I’d start off with some of the definitions of what we are calling 
‘enlightenment’ here. Some have called it a ‘human flourishing’ but the 
more classical Buddhist way of speaking about it is in via negativa  terms 
– such as ‘the ending of greed, hatred and delusion’ and ‘the ending of 
suffering’. That is the kind of language you come across in the Pali Buddhist 
scriptures of ancient India. They use more of a language of negation,
speaking in terms of what things are not rather than what they are.
In Buddhist tradition, and in a more mythological expression, 
enlightenment is also called ‘the ending of the cycle of birth and death’ 
– this makes reference to rebirth as well as to the diminishing and ending 
of rebirth. I think it’s helpful here to say that one of the things that 
attracted me and many other people towards the Buddha’s teachings is its 
non-dogmatic nature. I am quite aware that many people don’t like the

89
BEYOND
concepts of past lives, future lives and rebirth. That sort of terminology 
may send shudders through the system and that’s fair enough. I feel that 
even though the texts talk in terms like ‘ending the cycles of birth and 
death’, it is completely valid to think of that in terms of ‘psychological
birth and death’. 
What do I mean by that phrase? For example, you might be born into 
your current book project or your new experimental design. That is 
a birth. The mind takes hold of a particular venture, a possession, an 
identity, a personal relationship or a social role. We might say that we are 
born into the role of being a Dhamma teacher or into the role of being 
a professor, born into founding a particular project, and with that birth 
is also a delight. The delight comes from the sense that everything is 
going well, there is the aspiration that beautiful and useful things might 
come forth from it. But there is also the death element; perhaps things 
don’t work so well, or you don’t get funded the next time, or you present 
your thesis and you get slammed by your professors. There is a bitterness 
that comes when you have invested in something and then have to see 
your aspirations die. That is birth and death. Buddhist language does 
not just refer to physical birth and death, it also refers to psychological
birth and death.

90
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
My own teacher Ajahn Chah would use these terms when he talked about 
birth and death. He would talk about being born into a hope, being born 
into a building project, being born into the role of being a monk or a nun. 
So I feel it’s completely valid to think in terms of the freedom from birth 
and death as meaning freedom from being reborn into the entanglement 
and toxic identification that can come with taking hold of a project or a role 
or a position and so forth. ‘Freedom from birth and death’ therefore means 
a complete independence from addictive and compulsive attachments, as 
well as from self-centred attitudes. 
•  •  •
When I was an undergraduate student of psychology and physiology, many 
years ago, we studied Abraham Maslow’s ‘Hierarchy of Needs’, from his 
1943 paper ‘A Theory of Human Motivation’. I remember the pyramid that 
Maslow drew. ‘Physiological needs’ are at the base, above them is the ‘need 
for physical safety’, the next one up is the need for ‘love and belonging’. 
Then comes ‘esteem’ and at the top of his pyramid is ‘self-actualization’. I 
remember being in the lecture theatre and thinking, ‘That top part looks 
interesting. I can’t wait to get up to that self-actualization bit.’ But as you 
can probably guess, that turned out to be a very small part of the study. I 
found myself wondering why we were not spending much more time on the 
most interesting part of the picture.

91
BEYOND
Around about the same time I was introduced to Freud’s statement, at the 
end of his and Breuer’s Studies in Hysteria (1895), that, ‘… much will be gained 
if we succeed in transforming your hysterical misery into common human 
unhappiness.’ On hearing this, the clear intuition arose in me, ‘We can do 
better than that! There must be something better than “common human 
unhappiness” to look forward to!’
In a way, I’ve spent the last forty years on that top little triangle of Maslow’s 
Hierarchy. When we talk about the concept of enlightenment and its 
various degrees, I would suggest that’s all within that top triangle of selfactualization in Maslow’s diagram. Again, I’m not an academic psychologist 
so maybe that’s no longer considered a valid model, maybe it has been 
totally superseded over and over again, but that was what was in my mind 
forty years ago when I was a student. My desire to understand what selfactualization might consist of was one of the things that took me to Asia, so 
entering the forest monastic life was my way of working on my PhD. One of 
the reasons why I studied psychology was that I wanted to understand my 
own mind more completely, directly and effectively. I feel I’m still involved 
in this project, but from within the environment of the forest monastery 
instead of that of the Academy.
•  •  •

92
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
In the classical Buddhist teachings, there are four gradations or stages of 
enlightenment that are described over and over again.
The first level is called ‘stream-entry’. This represents an irreversible 
breakthrough into a quality of psychological integration or selfactualization, or ‘emotional intelligence’ that will necessarily result, 
eventually, in the ‘unshakeable well-being’ of full enlightenment. This 
means that the mind can only be deluded to a limited degree a certain 
number of times; the mind can only get so lost. This quality of streamentry is something that the Buddha praised as a realizable goal, not just for 
monastics but for lay people as well. The Buddha referred to those who had 
reached this level of realization as ‘noble people’, people who had seen the 
nature of ultimate reality, who had ‘glimpsed the Deathless’ to use another 
classical expression. Many thousands of lay people in the Buddha’s own 
time, as well as monastics, reached this level of stream-entry, and many 
have realized the same level since then. Stream-entry is a very realistic and 
realizable goal, as well as being an attractive one. 
The Buddha once reached down and scraped the ground in front of him 
and asked, ‘Do you see the dirt under my fingernail? What do you think 
is greater, the amount of dirt under my fingernail or the size of the great 
earth, the planet itself?’ One of those present answered, ‘Venerable Sir, 
the quantity of earth under your fingernail is small but the great earth

93
BEYOND
is very large indeed.’ The Buddha responded, ‘Similarly, the amount of 
future suffering you can expect to experience if you reach stream-entry is 
comparable to the dirt under my fingernail; while the amount of suffering 
ahead for those who have not reached stream-entry is comparable to the 
great earth’ (S 13.1). I think that one simile is enough to give you the idea of 
the appeal of realizing this level of psychological maturity. 
The element of ‘irreversibility’ associated with stream-entry is hugely 
significant. It means that once that level of insight has been reached 
then – irrespective of health, IQ, wealth or social position, or whether you 
have got tenure or not – you’re fine. A quality of profound ease, of deep 
psychological well-being manifests and it is independent of circumstances.
In addition, the Buddha declared that once stream-entry has been reached, 
full enlightenment is guaranteed within a minimum of seven lifetimes. For 
those of you who don’t like the idea of past and future lives, you can validly 
read that, I feel, as saying you can really blow it, i.e. get totally distracted and 
lost, no more than seven times. You can get utterly wrapped up, confused 
and angry, compulsive and depressed, but you can’t get totally lost more 
than seven times. Furthermore, each time, it is going to get harder to be so 
carried away. Although that may sound somewhat heretical with respect 
to some conservative approaches to Buddhist teachings I feel that it is a 
perfectly valid way of understanding the Buddha’s guarantee here.

94
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
At the level of stream-entry, three psychological, largely attitudinal, 
qualities are let go of. These are categorized in terms of what are called the 
‘ten fetters’ or saṃyojana in Pali – a fetter being like handcuffs or chains or 
shackles that tie your mind down. The three assumptions or attitudes that 
are let go of at stream-entry are:
1 Attachment to the body and to the personality. This attachment is 
called ‘self-view’ or ‘personality view’, ( sakkāya-diṭṭhi); it comprises the 
view, ‘I am the body, I am the personality, this is all and everything of
 what I am.’ 
2 Doubt about the path to liberation, about the way to arrive at genuine, 
unshakeable well-being, and about the possibility of full psychological 
integration.
3 Attachment to one’s social conditioning, namely the conventions and 
forms, rites and rituals that one is familiar with. This technically refers 
to religious forms like feeling that you have to bathe in the River Ganges 
to wash away your bad karma or being baptised in a Christian church 
in order to be one of the saved. However, my teacher, Ajahn Chah, 
would say that it also refers to conventions in general, including social 
ones, such as the value of money, fashions, nationality or supporting a 
particular sports team – saying that ‘this one is good, that one is bad’, 
‘this is right, that is wrong’, with the implication that that value is an

95
BEYOND
intrinsic quality, rather than having been ascribed by social agreement. 
All of this is ‘attachment to conventions’.
The level above stream-entry is that of the ‘once-returner’, (sakadāgāmin). 
Such a per son experiences a reduction of sense-desire ( kāma-rāga) and a 
reduction of ill-will (vyapāda). A ‘once-returner’ is reborn in the human 
realm only one more time before their complete enlightenment. The mind 
is far less drawn into sense-desire and ill-will. At this level of realization, 
well-being or psychological maturity, you can still feel anger or aversion, 
you can still feel craving or greed and lust, but these emotions can no longer 
dominate the heart. They can no longer overwhelm the mind.
The third level is that of the ‘non-returner’ (anāgāmin). In terms of Buddhist 
cosmology, this means that such a person is never again reborn in the 
human realm. They would be reborn only in one of the higher heavenly 
realms, in what are called the ‘The Pure Abodes’ (Sudhāvāsā). The basis of 
Pure Land Buddhism is the aim to be reborn in one of those higher realms. 
The realization of the level of anāgāmin brings with it the complete ending 
of craving for sense-pleasures and all ill-will. 
With respect to the fourth level, even though the realization of the 
‘non-returner’ represents an extremely advanced state, non-returners 
still have work to do if they are to arrive at complete enlightenment. 
In order for full enlightenment, Arahantship, to be realized, five more

96
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
fetters, shackles that tie the heart down must be broken. These last five
fetters are: 
1 Attachment to and identification with blissful mind-states based
 on form, rūpa-rāga.
2 Attachment to and identification with blissful mind-states based
 on formlessness, arūpa-rāga. 
3 Identification with the subtle mind-states associated with feelings of ‘I’, 
‘me’ and ‘mine’. This is asmi-māna and it is different from attachment 
to self-view (sakkāya-diṭṭhi). In the Khemaka Sutta (S 22.89), a monk said, 
‘There is no attachment to the body or the personality. It is really clear 
to me that body and personality are not who and what I am. But still, 
this “I” feeling persists. Just as one cannot really tell where the scent of 
a flower comes from – is it the petals or the pollen or the stalk? – but the 
scent is there. So too, even though there is no attachment to the body 
or personality, no attachment to feeling, perception or consciousness, 
still the ‘I’ feeling endures.’ Arahantship, then, includes the letting go of 
asmi-māna, the conceit of identity. 
4 The next fetter that is shed in the move from non-returner to Arahant  
is the letting go of ‘uddhacca’, which literally means ‘restlessness’. This 
is not about fidgeting on your meditation cushion, but rather is about a

97
BEYOND
subtle kind of restlessness, the attitude that: ‘That looks more interesting 
than this’; or ‘There is something over there in the future, in some other 
place that is more real, more rich, more satisfying, more interesting 
than this.’ Letting go of uddhacca is letting go of any imputed ‘otherness’ 
based on the perceptions of time, location and subject-object duality.
5 The last fetter of all is avijjā, or ‘ignorance’ (also called ‘nescience’ or 
‘unawareness’). This describes the final remnants of unmindfulness 
and bias that prevent the mind from being attuned to the fundamental 
reality of experience. When this last fetter has fallen away, the mind or 
heart is said to be fully liberated (vimutti) or enlightened (bodhi), and 
birth and death are said to have come to an end. The Buddha’s own 
description of his enlightenment, to his first five pupils, states:
Ayam-antimā jāti natthi dāni punabbhavo‘ti.
‘This is the last birth. There will be no more renewal of being ’ (S 56.11).
There is no need to dwell too much on these broader details of the four 
stages at this time; they are spelled out here so that they are available as a 
general map.
•  •  •
To come back to stream-entry, which is the main subject being explored 
here, I would like to emphasize that this should be considered to be a ve ry 
realizable goal. My teachers and mentors would say such things as: ‘If you

98
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
have enough faith and interest to come and live in a monastery, or show up 
at meditation retreats, to sit and deal with restlessness and physical pain, 
and to work hard at training your mind for a week or ten days, then you 
probably have all that you need in order to realize stream-entry.’ If you 
have that amount of faith and commitment, and focus, if you really want to 
understand how your mind works, and are prepared to work and deal with 
difficulty in order to gain that understanding, then you have most of the 
requisite qualities to realize stream-entry.
When making a point to describe the necessary qualities for stream-entry, 
the Buddha once said:
‘Even if these great sal trees, Mahānāma, could understand what is well 
spoken and what is badly spoken, then I would declare these great sal 
trees to be stream-enterers, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed 
in destiny, with enlightenment as their destination.’
(S 55.24, Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)
I don’t make this point lightly. I feel that it’s important to recognize that 
stream-entry is an achievable goal. That irreversible quality of wellbeing, that breakthrough to full psychological integration that cannot be 
completely fallen away from, is a reachable goal for most people if they

99
BEYOND
have the faith to engage in and practise meditation, and to really sit down 
and work on their mind, their life.
•  •  •
Stream-entry, that degree of profound well-being, is thus an achievable 
goal but merely knowing of it as a meaningful possibility does not make it 
an actuality in one’s life, does it? The shelves of the larder can be filled with 
the right ingredients but that doesn’t make a meal. Knowing that the Dutch 
language exists and wanting to be able to speak it is not the same as being 
able to. So, what are the means whereby we can make that ideal of streamentry a reality in our experience?
Meditation, as mentioned, is certainly a significant contributor to its actu -
alization, however, it is not the only factor that supports it. In his teach -
ings, the Buddha speaks of a number of other elements that facilitate that 
realization; they are called ‘the factors that support stream-entry’ (S 55.5).
1 The first one is ‘association with good people’ (sappurisa-saṃseva). 
Sappurisa means a good person or a well-rounded person; ‘sa-’ means 
‘good’ or ‘right’ or ‘true’ or ‘harmonious’, ‘-purisa’ means ‘a person’; 
saṃseva means ‘companionship’ or ‘association’. So, spending time with 
good people, drawing close to good-hearted people, drawing close to 
wise people, is the first factor supporting stream-entry.

100
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
2 Next is to ‘attend to wise teachings’ (sadhammasavana); this means to 
take the time to listen to teachings, to ideas and explanations that guide 
the mind towards that quality of psychological integration and wellbeing, towards peacefulness and clarity, and away from ego-centred 
drives and destructive behaviours. In Buddhist terms this i s ‘listening to 
the good Dhamma’ or ‘the true Dhamma’.
3 Then there is ‘wise reflection’ (yoniso manasikāra), which means, literally, 
‘attending to the root or to the origin of things’. We attend, we consider, 
we reflect upon our experience. This includes reflecting upon our feelings 
of liking and disliking, our feelings of being approved of or the feeling 
of being criticized, the feeling of success, the feeling of failure. When 
you launch a project or carry out a study and you don’t get the results 
you were expecting, yoniso manasikāra  is that part of intelligence that 
wonders, ‘Hmmmm… what is the pattern here? How is this working?’ It 
is the capacity to look into the way things operate and to recognize the 
patterning of experience, and how the natural order functions. This is 
‘wise reflection’ or ‘attending wisely’. In Buddhist practice a lot of wise 
reflection revolves around watching our moods and listening to our 
thoughts. It is the quality of being able to step back and say, ‘This is the 
feeling of liking, this is the feeling of disliking. Here is the experience of 
me getting into the car and being annoyed by the traffic.’

101
BEYOND
4 The final way to strengthen stream-entry is ‘practising Dhamma 
in accordance with Dhamma’ (dhammānudhammappaṭipatti) , which 
means engaging in meditation and developing wholesome states in 
tune with reality. That is to say, working with the mind in a way that 
is free from self-view and self-centred attitudes. This is because we 
often practise meditation in tune with our egotistical drives (‘Because 
I want to attain enlightenment and be the most impressive!’) or with a 
sense of obligation, because we have been told to ‘do it this way’ by an 
expert or a teacher. We can engage in meditation driven by obligation, 
by obedience, by ambition, by aggression: ‘I’m going to wipe out my 
defilements. I’m going to make my thinking mind shut up!’ But this is 
practising Dhamma not in accordance with Dhamma, but in accordance 
with aggression, with self-view, and with aversion, ambition and greed 
and so forth. Instead, meditation and the other aspects of training need 
to be guided by mindfulness and wisdom (sati-paññā). This will then 
be what informs all action and decision-making rather than habitual 
fears, desires and aversions. Here the Buddha is encouraging us to 
make effort and give direction to our lives based on the cultivation of 
means that are helpful and wholesome since those will lead to the most 
beneficial results. The means and the end are unified. The Buddha is 
therefore encouraging us to incline away from working in a way that 
is unhelpful and unwholesome as that can only lead to more alienation 
and disharmony, to more suffering in the end.

102
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
In summary those four factors supporting stream-entry are: associating 
with good people, listening to true teachings, reflecting wisely, and 
practising Dhamma in accordance with Dhamm a. 
•  •  •
Another small but significant aspect to men tion is that sometimes 
we mistake awareness or knowing, as understood from the Buddhist 
perspective, to mean a sort of mental agility. The quality of stream-entry 
is not dependent on being able to articulate or even to think clearly. This 
is an important principle. It is not dependent on clarity of thought. You 
don’t have to remember your lines. True insight can be established without 
a dependence on memory, conceptual thought or language. True insight is 
rather a quality of vision, a quality of attitude, and attitude is not a concept. 
It is a way of seeing, a way of being. It is an awakened knowing, awareness 
itself, rather than knowing about things.
Ajahn Chah had a stroke when he was in his sixties. His brain function 
was quite heavily compromised. During the period of time when he could 
still speak, sometimes monks would come to visit and he might want to 
say, ‘Come here Sumedho’ but what emerged was ‘Come here Ānando’; or 
he’d mean to say, ‘It’s good to see you’ while what would come out would 
be something like, ‘Blue dog happy Thursday.’ And he would realize that 
was nonsense. He knew that the words of his choosing hadn’t been spoken

103
BEYOND
and that a different set of words had appeared instead, but he found this 
amusing instead of distressing. He understood that his thinking functions 
were misfiring, but he didn’t have any suffering about it. He was at ease 
with it even though it was not under his control. He described it by saying, 
‘The monkeys are playing about  in the telephone exchange.’
This shows that unshakeable well-being, as discussed here, does not depend 
on a healthy body or even on a capacity for orderly thinking. Rather it is a 
matter of attitude. It is a steadiness of the inner vision, of apperception. It 
is the ability to appreciate the ever-changing field of experience, regardless 
of its contents, with openness, easefulness and impartiality. Our happiness 
then does not depend on any single ‘thing’ or object, rather it is grounded 
in a commodious awareness of the process  of experiencing, rather than in 
the contents of those experiences. 
•  •  •
What has been presented here is a short summary of the principles relating 
to enlightenment, as understood in the Southern School of Buddhism, 
in response to the question of the title: ‘Is the Buddhist concept of 
enlightenment a meaningful possibility in the current age?’ It is a description 
of some of the relevant ingredients available in the psychological ‘larder’ as 
well as something of a recipe of how to put them together in order to create 
a nourishing meal resulting, ultimately, in an ‘unshakeable well-being’.

104
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Whether we as individuals make use of those ingredients in a skilful way 
to support that kind of well-being, or whether we ignore them or create an 
un-nutritious concoction, is up to each one of us.
Please also bear in mind that the points described here are not intended to 
be dogmatic assertions that are expected to be believed out of hand. Rather 
they should be regarded as reflections offered for consideration that, if 
they prove to be valid and meaningful through personal experience, can be 
used to aid individuals in the actualization of a quality of well-being that is 
liberating, enriching and indeed unshakeable.
I have outlined a few of the main themes of the subject here and I suspect 
that there are many questions that arise accordingly; if there are any 
aspects of all this that it would be useful to elaborate on, please ask
whatever you like…

105
BEYOND
Questions & Responses
Q  You said you trained under Ajahn Chah and his teaching. Was Ajahn Chah 
an Arahant or not? What are your views on it?
A  If I have met an Arahant he definitely was one. But you can’t really judge 
from the outside. If people asked Ajahn Chah if he was an Arahant, he would 
say, ‘It takes one to know one,’ or ‘Why are you asking me that? Instead, you 
should ask yourself why you are not.’ He certainly seemed like the happiest 
man in the world. That was one of the most striking things about him.
The scriptures state that one of the qualities of stream-entry is to be 
‘independent of others in the training, the practice’. That quality of 
independence doesn’t mean being isolated or abstracted, or having an 
egotistical attitude of ‘I don’t care what anybody thinks.’ Rather it is a 
profound self-reliance, self-confidence. Ajahn Chah didn’t need anyone to 
like him or to approve of him. If you tried to flatter him, he’d make you look 
at why on earth you were doing that. You could never second-guess him. He 
had an extraordinary quality of ease coupled with a tremendous liveliness. 
He paid close attention to those he was with and what was going on, yet 
he simultaneously displayed an extraordinary relaxation at the same time.

106
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
He was fully attuned to what was happening, but he didn’t need it to be a 
particular way in order for him to be happy. 
Ajahn Chah was an extremely strict and orthodox monk – we practise 
in a rigorous and traditional religious order that is 2,500 years old – but 
despite that set of conventional limitations he had an astonishing quality 
of freedom. He was completely at ease with whatever happened, which 
doesn’t mean to say that he had ‘checked out’, off in some distracted dream 
world; he was simply very flexible, responsive and adaptable with respect 
to how situations unfolded.
Having had a stroke, and become pretty much physically paralysed, he was 
still cracking jokes about his brain function collapsing. Not trying to put a 
brave face on it out of insecurity, but being genuinely OK with watching 
what was unfolding in his life. He had enjoyed having his faculties and 
had made good use of them. He had used them well to help himself and 
others. Now that those faculties were fading, he was quite OK with them as 
they disappeared. He did the best he could with them as they were going, 
but there was no sense of loss as they were fading. The last ever formal 
Dhamma talk that he gave, in 1981, published in English as ‘Why Are We 
Here?’, spells out this skilful attitude with great clarity. His stroke and the 
subsequent brain damage happened shortly thereafter.
•  •  •

107
BEYOND
Q  Ajahn, how do the qualities leading to stream-entry align with the ways 
of working with each of the Four Noble Truths? Or, another way of putting 
it, how does ‘self-actualization’ relate to the Eightfold Path?  
A  Throughout my monastic life and training, I have related to the Four 
Noble Truths as a set of practices to apply, rather than as a set of doctrines to 
believe in. In application, these Truths are an embracing of the experience 
of living rather than a set of religious opinions. In his very first teaching, 
‘The Setting in Motion of the Wheel of Dhamma’ (S 56.11), the Buddha 
outlined specific ways of working with each of the Four Noble Truths.
Noble Truth #1  There is the pleasant, the unpleasant and the neutral. 
There is the recognition of what is harmful or beneficial or neutral 
amongst those feelings, as well as any mental pain (dukkha) that arises 
from the way the mind is hanging on to these. The response to this, the 
way of working with it that the Buddha advises is, ‘This mental pain is to 
be apprehended, embraced, fully received (pariññeyan’ti)’. This process 
is related to Right View.
Noble Truth #2:  This is the recognition of where entanglements and 
grasping, where identification is happening, where the mental pain 
originates from (dukkha-samudaya). The Buddha advises us to let go of 
whatever is being grasped at (pahātabban’ti). This process is related to 
Right Effort.

108
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Noble Truth #3  Is the realization of the ending of suffering (dukkhanirodha). When things have been let go of, what remains is the quality 
of peace and stillness, the sense of wholeness. Peace is present when 
the grasping stops. The response to this, the way of working with it that 
the Buddha advises, is ‘it is to be known, to be made real or realized’  
(saccikātabban’ti). Again, this is related to Right View. 
Noble Truth #4  Is the Eightfold Path that leads to that peace (dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā) . This Path needs to be developed, acted upon, 
cultivated (bhāvetabban’ti). And again, this is related to Right Effort. In 
addition, the ways of working with each of the Four Truths needs to be 
informed by Right Mindfulness – so Right View, Right Effort and Right 
Mindfulness have a special role in the process of liberation (see M 117).
A follow-up point on the Third Noble Truth and the way to work with it is 
that, as Ajahn Sumedho noticed for himself and for many Westerners, peace 
tends to be boring. We like to engage. We like to act. When we experience 
peace, it’s usually interesting for about three or four seconds, then we 
think, ‘OK, what’s next?’ We start looking for the next thing to become 
engrossed in, to be worried about, to be annoyed with. So true peace is 
important but elusive. It is like noticing space. In a room, we notice the 
other people because of faces and clothing, the histories between us and 
all the eyes looking at us. Our attention doesn’t go to the space. The space 
is not interesting; the people are interesting. But if we don’t notice the

109
BEYOND
space then our life gets very crowded. If we don’t notice silence, if we don’t 
notice stillness, then our life is a continual lurch from one engagement, one 
agitation, to another. 
When that stressing stops, wh en there is peace, that is the ending of 
dukkha but it needs to be realized, made real, noticed. It is like coming into 
an empty room. Instead of just scooting through on the way to the next 
thing, you sit down for a moment and feel the space. The initial blankness 
turns into a kind of flowering: ‘This is peaceful. This is quiet. This is still.
This is beautiful.’
That might seem like a mere perceptual effect but it is really the essence 
of what the Third Truth is pointing to – we need to realize peace. We need 
to know it consciously because the conditioning of our senses is in the 
opposite direction, towards objects. Our seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting 
and touching are geared towards survival – keeping away from predators, 
connecting with our group, looking for objects to eat or to mate with or 
to possess, protecting our territory, or our young. Our attention is geared 
towards objects, towards movement, that which is loud, bright and mobile. 
So if we don’t consciously notice space, silence and stillness, if we don’t 
learn how to relish solitude, the subtle and the indistinct, then the state of 
inner peace will always be seen as a state of lack, a state in which something 
is missing. It will not be recognized for what it is.

110
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
If we are able to stop and realize that quality of spaciousness, we realize that 
there is a mysterious wholeness, a fulfilment, a completeness, a fullness of 
heart. In Sanskrit it is called pūrṇa, in Pali puṇṇa. We do not notice this state 
of beatitude if we are busy running on towards the next thing.
One of the very useful practices directly geared for developing the supports 
for stream-entry, specifically related to ‘wise reflection’ (yoniso manasikāra), 
navigating skilfully, is called ‘developing the perception of impermanence, 
or uncertainty’ (anicca-saññā). This was one of Ajahn Chah’s central 
teachings. The practice is to keep bringing the awareness, the recollection 
of uncertainty to mind at all times. This is in relation to our judgements, 
our perceptions, and to anything that we think we are in the middle of 
doing. For example:
I might think: ‘I’m going to fly back to England tonight.’
To which the wise reflective response is: ‘Is that so?’ 
It is not certain. It is not a sure thing. Nothing is.
Conscious reflection on uncertainty, the development of the anicca-saññā, 
is a way of attuning the heart to the awareness that every aspect of the 
material world, of the sensory, conditioned world, is intrinsically uncertain 
and in a state of change. We literally don’t know what it is going to change 
into, we don’t know what is going to happen next. This reflection helps us 
wake up into the spacious stillness that is always ‘here’, rather than being

111
BEYOND
entranced and enchanted by ‘the thing that I’m doing’ or ‘the place that I 
think I’m going’. This reflection helps us to keep things in perspective.
It is a simple exercise. You can ask the question whenever you make
a judgement:
‘That’s great!’ – ‘Is that so?’
‘That’s awful!’ – ‘Is that so?’
It is a very straightforward practice but, if we apply it, it is surprising how 
much space we find in our lives, both psychological space and social space. 
It is a simple way of correcting our perspective on things: ‘This is a mental 
event that is part of a transient experiential field. That’s what it has always 
been.’ And what remains when that letting go happens? The awakened 
knowing. That letting go of the false sense of certainty, that expectation, 
and realizing the peace that comes from that, these two stages are the 
essence of Dhamma practice. The more that process can be embodied, the 
more we will find genuine peace. 
This realization is also the resolution of doubt about what is the Path 
and what is not the Path; grasping is the cause of tension, of dukkha, of 
imbalance, of discord in the heart, and when the grasping stops that is 
Nibbāna, here and now. 
The Buddha said that reflection on impermanence helps the mind to be
free of the conceit of ‘I am’ (asmi-māna) – ‘I am doing something. I am going

112
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
somewhere. I am somebody’ – ‘And when the heart is free of the conceit “I 
am”, that is Nibbāna, here and now’ (A 9.3, Ud 4.1). 
•  •  •
Q  For the last three or four days we were spending time, via classes, studying 
the science of mindfulness. How do you reconcile teachings that are as old 
as traditional Buddhism with science that keeps advancing and redefining 
concepts of mindfulness?
A  As a monk in the Theravādan tradition, I confess that I am biased in my 
view, as you might expect! So, although I find a lot of the science very 
significant, I don’t feel that Buddha-Dhamma needs modern science to 
validate it. 
The language of the current age tends to be secular-materialist. In many 
respects, people worship the god of data – if you have a graph and verifiable 
statistics, that carries weight, ‘Science has proved…’. In olden times, one 
mark of authority was a big hat. The bigger the hat you wore, the more 
impressive your spiritual status was, the more extensive and reliable your 
influence. Now it’s not a hat. It’s if you are an Oxford don, or a head of 
department at Brown University, or you’ve got a Nobel prize, those are the 
accoutrements of power, respect and authority: ‘How many books have 
you published? How many papers? How many followers have you got on 
Facebook? What’s your Erdős number?’

113
BEYOND
With the changing of language and cultural mores, even though Buddhist 
teachings and practices might be essentially as they were 2500 years ago, 
there is a need to translate things into a language that people respect and 
which has meaning for a modern audience. The Buddha himself was aware 
of this and accounted for it, both in what are called the mahā-padesa rules 
(for transmission of his teaching to other countries and for future ages), as 
well as in his own culturally inclusive pedagogical style.
The Buddha would regularly use long associative or adjectival strings of 
words when he spoke. For instance, in his first teaching he said, ‘ Cakkhuṃ 
udapādi, nāṇaṃ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi.’  This 
means, ‘Vision arose, knowledge arose, wisdom arose, awareness arose, 
light arose’ (S 56.11). People often wonder why he used such long strings 
of words like that. An elder monk, Ven. Ānanda Maitreya, who was a very 
gifted scholar and meditator, once pointed out that, at any one time, the 
Buddha was very probably speaking to people from a number of different 
countries. So for example, when describing closely related qualities, maybe 
in Vaṃsa they say ‘āloko’, in Magadha they say ‘paññā’, while the folks up in 
Uttarakuru, they are always talking about ‘vijjā’. He would thus use different 
words so that people from Uttarakuru and Magadha and Vaṃsa would all 
know what he was talking about. He was a supremely skilled communicator 
so he talked to people in the languages they could understand.

114
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Such translation is essential in order to apply the Buddha’s teaching to 
the purpose for which it was intended. A lot of those antique terms need 
translation in order to be meaningful today – like calling enlightenment 
‘unshakeable well-being’ for the purpose of this conference. You put it into 
different language so that the people who are present can feel, ‘Oh right – 
“well-being”. Yes. That’s my field. I know what that’s talking about.’ Whereas 
if you talk about ‘sammāsambodhi’ literally, ‘perfect self-enlightenment’ it’s 
a bit more remote, harder to relate to. 
The Buddha was a pragmatic teacher, not an idealistic one. He was often 
described as being a kind of doctor. His style was, rather than merely stating, 
‘I assure you well-being is possible,’ he was the kind of doctor who asks, 
‘Where does it hurt?’ He put things into a language that was meaningful to 
people, so that they would think, ‘That’s talking about my life, my ailment, 
my problems. I can relate to that. These are methods I can pick up and use. 
Marvellous. I can do this!’
Even though I just said, ‘I don’t really feel that the Buddha-Dhamma needs 
modern science to validate it,’ I also feel it would be a ridiculous conceit 
to say that Buddhism has nothing to learn from science. If Buddhism is to 
be a useful presence in the world then it has to connect with the people 
who comprise that human world, and that connection is through language 
and meaning. If what carries meaning these days is scientific studies and

115
BEYOND
data, and all of the thousands of hours that you good people put into the 
laboratory and crunching your numbers, if that brings forth meaningful 
messages that help people, marvellous! Such science is a very helpful 
adjunct to what Buddhism has been doing for over two thousand years. 
It is helping the Dhamma message to be communicated in a language that 
people can understand and make use of. 
I thus feel that the language of science is very helpful in encouraging people 
to pick up new methods, ways and means, that can genuinely benefit their 
lives. This language encourages people to use mindfulness practices such as 
MBCT, MBSR, Dot-be and all the other related disciplines, to bring benefit 
to their own lives and to the lives of the people around them. 
•  •  •
Q  Can you speak freely on the Arahant versus the Bodhisattva pathway? 
A  Both of those pathways articulate very valuable and wonderfully 
admirable spiritual possibilities. I feel that what contention there has 
been, over the centuries, has been more to do with professional jealousy 
than any conflict or contradiction based in reality. There is a very human 
and natural tribalism: ‘Our village is good, you people on the other side 
of the river are all idiots.’ ‘My department is way superior to yours.’ And 
so forth... I’m sure that some of you in the academic world are familiar
with this condition.

116
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
The Mahāyāna movement grew out of an apparent ossification that was 
happening within the Buddhist monastic order in the first few hundred 
years after the Buddha’s time. Buddhism had become, it seems, a kind of 
priesthood locked into its own self-interest. The Mahāyāna movement 
arose, according to the histories, from the intention to open things up to 
a wider sphere of people, to speak about the benefits of the teachings, the 
blessings that arise for all beings from people engaging in the practice of the 
teachings. It wasn’t all about just practising for your own liberation. This 
is a very brief thumbnail sketch of the situation and, as you might expect, 
there are numerous versions of this history. However, the differences of 
perspective can be superficially characterized as: a) Arahant – ‘The best 
thing you can do with your life is to realize full and complete enlightenment’; 
and b) Bodhisattva – ‘The welfare of others is more important than your 
own. Spiritual fulfilment can only come when the suffering of all beings, 
even “down to the last blade of grass “, has been fully alleviated.’ These 
are over-simplifications, even caricatures, but they are representative of 
definitions that have been circulated and attached to over the centuries. 
I would suggest that it is through a wrong grasp of the fundamental 
principle of the Four Noble Truths, as a teaching, that it can seem like the 
so-called ‘Arahant path’ is all about liberating oneself from suffering and 
everyone else can just go take care of themselves. Similarly, I feel it’s a

117
BEYOND
wrong grasping of the Bodhisattva Vows, particularly through seeing them 
in terms of self-view, that makes the Bodhisattva path seem to be in conflict 
with the Arahant path. After all, if we vow to not reach full enlightenment 
until all other beings have been enlightened before us, if there is more than 
one Bodhisattva in the mix, who is going to go first? As the Buddhist joke 
goes, with two such Bodhisattvas at the Doors to the Deathless: ‘After you.’ 
‘No. I insist, after you…’, ad infinitum.
I have spent a lot of time over the years in different Northern Buddhist 
monasteries and countries, with the Tibetan, the Chinese and the Japanese 
traditions. In most of such places there is a recitation of the Bodhisattva 
Vows as well as ‘The Heart Sūtra’ each day. 
This is a very significant juxtaposition, because ‘The Heart Sūtra’ says: 
There is no suffering, there is no origin of suffering, there is no cessation 
of suffering, no Path, no understanding and no attaining for there is 
nothing to attain. 
While the Bodhisattva Vows say:
 1 Living beings are numberless, I vow to save them all; 
 2 Afflictions are limitless, I vow to cut them off; 
 3 The Buddha’s Way is supreme, I vow to accomplish it;
 4 Dharma doors are infinite, I vow to enter them all.

118
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
So you have ‘The Heart Sūtra’ which takes the Four Noble Truths and empties 
them out, saying: ‘There is no suffering … no origin … no cessati on … there 
is no Path’ – these are all empty. And you have the Bodhisattva Vows which 
are, apparently, a deliberate extension of the Four Noble Truths to spell out 
the principle that they relate not just to the individual but to all beings. 
I came across an interesting sūtra in the Chinese tradition (‘The Buddha 
Speaks the Brahma Net Sūtra’) that spelled out the relationship between 
the Four Noble Truths and the Four Bodhisattva Vows. The latter, it seems, 
arose directly from the former.
1 In regard to the First Noble Truth, it says that the First Vow is based on 
the fact that not only is there dukkha here in our mind, but it arises in 
the minds of all beings. All are suffering. Thus is born the aspiration to 
help all beings to end their dukkha.
2 In regard to the Second Noble Truth, the vow is to cut off all afflictions (the 
cause of suffering) not just in our mind, but in the minds of numberless 
beings. The vow is to help every being to end all their afflictions,
 their cravings. 
3 The Third Noble Truth gives rise to the aspiration towards Buddhahood: 
‘The Buddha’s Path is supreme, I vow to accomplish it.’ The Third 
Noble Truth is dukkha-nirodha. The ending of suffering is possible. In

119
BEYOND
this extension it is characterized by the possibility of the complete 
consummation of spiritual potential – i.e. not just with ending dukkha, 
which all Arahants do, but developing all the teaching powers and skills 
of a Buddha as well, as Bodhisattvas do.
4 The Fourth Noble Truth is that of ‘The Eightfold Path that Leads to the 
Ending of Dukkha’. This expands to: ‘Dharma doors are infinite’ and 
there is the vow to enter them all. This refers to cultivating skilful 
social, psychological and spiritual means of every kind in order to help 
all beings to attain enlightenment, as well as fulfilling all the factors of 
the Eightfold Path. 
These two, seemingly contradictory, teachings are being recited and 
reflected upon side by side on a daily basis. Thus in the Mahāyāna, or 
Northern Buddhist tradition, ‘The Heart Sūtra’, empties out the Four Noble 
Truths, while the Bodhisattva Vows indicate that the Four Noble Truths 
relate to all beings – I would suggest that this juxtaposition is no accident, 
rather it is intended to express both the emptiness and the universality 
of those Noble Truths. In addition I would say that the Buddha’s original 
teaching of the Four Noble Truths, as found in the Theravāda, or Southern 
Buddhist tradition, was meant to imply both of those qualities – emptiness 
and universality – but those dimensions have sometimes been missed or 
lost over the ages.

120
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
This understandin g is what you find within some of the contemplative 
lineages of the Southern school, as well as within those of a similar nature 
in the Northern school today. These Truths are ‘noble’ insofar as they are 
conventional truths which, if applied correctly, lead to the realization of the 
ultimate truth. They are not ultimate or absolute truths in and of themselves, 
like some kind of would-be incontrovertible concept. Furthermore, if they 
are applied free from self-view, it will be recognized that they do not apply 
just to ‘this’ being, instead they are necessarily relevant to all beings. 
The focus of attention doesn’t go just to this being, it is appropriate to
apply it universally.
The Buddha described this relationship between saving oneself and 
saving all beings very simply and clearly in the Sedaka Sutta (‘The Bamboo 
Acrobats’, S 47.19) with the following parable:
Once upon a time a bamboo acrobat, setting up his bamboo pole, 
addressed his young assistant Medakathalika (whose name means 
‘Frying Pan’):
‘Come, dear Medakathalika, climb up the bamboo pole and stand up on 
its top.’
‘OK, master’ Medakathalika replied to the bamboo acrobat; and climbing 
up the bamboo pole she stood at the very top.
Then the bamboo acrobat said to her: ‘You look after me, dear

121
BEYOND
Medakathalika, and I’ll look after you. With us looking after each other, 
guarding one another, we’ll show off our skills, receive good payment, 
and you’ll be able to climb safely down from the pole.’
This being said, the assistant Medakathalika said to the bamboo acrobat: 
‘That’s not right, master! You look after yourself, and I will look after 
myself. Thus with each of us looking after ourselves, guarding ourselves, 
we’ll show off our skills, receive good payment, and I’ll be able to climb 
safely down from the pole. That’s the way to do it!’
Just like the assistant, Medakathalika, said to her master: ‘I will look 
after myself,’ this is the way you monks should practise the Four 
Foundations of Mindfulness. But you should also practise the Four 
Foundations of Mindfulness by resolving, ‘I will look after others’ too. 
Looking after oneself, one looks after others. Looking after others, one
looks after oneself.
And how does one look after others by looking after oneself? By 
practising mindfulness, by developing it, by using it over and over.
And how does one look after oneself by looking after others? By patience 
(khanti), by non-harming (avihiṃsa), by loving-kindness (mettā-citta), 
by sympathy, and by caring for others (anuddayatā). Thus by looking 
after oneself, one looks after others, and by looking after others, one
looks after oneself.

... Happily Ever After
The COVID-19 pandemic has render ed these times extraordinary. Many 
restrictions have been put in place by the UK Government and all around 
the world: in Ireland all the pubs are closed; in France the cafes, restaurants, 
cinemas, theatres are closed; in Austria they don’t allow gatherings of more 
than five people together. Borders are closed in many countries and people 
are encouraged or required to isolate themselves in their own homes. These 
are extraordinary measures, unprecedented in our times. 
The level of alarm, concern and anxiety around this country and the world 
is understandably very high with the numbers of people infected being in 
the millions. Many people who have been infected by the virus have passed 
away already. These are issues of great concern, they impact everybody’s 
lives. But I feel in terms of our lives, it’s not just a matter of what we do 
to look after our own health and the health of those with whom we are in 
contact, but it’s also important not to forget why we’re here at Amaravati 
in the first place.
Why do people choose to live at a spiritual centre like Amaravati? Why do 
we come to a place and focus our attention on practising the Buddhist path 
and reflecting on the Buddha’s teachings?

124
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
One of the essential things I would suggest we consider is that, with the 
pandemic, in a way nothing has changed. The presence of this illness and the 
process of it spreading all round the world, being extremely communicable, 
and the disruption to people’s lives that it has brought, this is the kind of 
thing that the Buddha’s teaching prepares us for. It’s an object lesson in 
uncertainty and the fragile nature of our lives, our health, our well-being, 
and our very lifespan.
It’s important to see that, in a profound sense, nothing has ‘gone wrong’. 
This is actually ‘situation normal’. The fragile nature of life has always been 
this way. We, as a human society, particularly in the comfortable West, 
have perhaps become oblivious, unaware, of that fragile nature. We’ve 
become complacent. We take things for granted. We assume that things are 
predictable, that we should be able to live a comfortable life, that there’ll be 
medical resources when we need them, that we’ll be able to go to the places 
that we like to go to and do the things we like to do and spend time with 
the people that we like. We like to think that life is predictable and that we 
can carry on in the way that we assume it’s meant to be, and that we’ll be 
able to live happily ever after with our families or with the people that we 
like in our community.
The presence of this disease, going rampant around the world, disrupts 
that kind of fairy tale imagination. It makes it very clear that those kinds

125
BEYOND
of assumptions are based upon seeing things in a shallow way. We are not 
seeing the whole picture. The Buddha’s teachings point directly at this 
uncertain and fragile nature of our lives. A teaching I like to quote on this, 
from the Northern Buddhist tradition, is Section 38 of ‘The Sūtra in Fortytwo Sections’. The Buddha addresses an assembly and asks the question, 
‘How long is a human lifespan?’ 
And the first person says, ‘Just a few days.’
The Buddha responds: ‘You don’t understand my teaching.’
The next one says, ‘A single day and a single night.’ 
Again, the Buddha says, ‘You don’t understand my teaching.’ 
Then the next monk says, ‘The time it takes to eat a meal.’
Once more the Buddha says, ‘You don’t understand my teaching.’ 
Finally, a monk says, ‘We can only expect to live for the time it takes to go 
from the beginning to the end of an in-breath or from the beginning to the 
end of an out-breath.’ 
To this the Buddha responds, ‘Excellent. You have understood my teaching.’
(A parallel teaching to this one is found in the Pali Canon at A 6.19)
If you time that, it’s about three or four seconds. That’s the lifespan we can

126
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
reasonably look forward to. To our egos and to our habitual perceptions 
that’s shocking and frightening – we can only look forward to living 
another three or four seconds. Is the Buddha trying to scare us? Is he being 
depressive or threatening? No, he’s being realistic. That’s how nature 
works. If we have an aneurism, if a blood vessel bursts in our brain, then we 
have that amount of time before everything starts to go black and then out 
we go. Life can come to an end that quickly through natural circumstances, 
not through being hit by a car or falling off a cliff, but just through the 
body giving out. We have that amount of time to play with, that’s all
we can be sure of.
The rest is extra.
This is the reason why the Buddha points this fact out, he is encouraging us 
to be realistic and not to be complacent and deluded, not to take things for 
granted. Instead we need to bring urgent attention to the present reality, 
the present experience, and to focus on what the mind is doing at this 
moment, since this is the only place we can make a difference. So, in what 
way is our mind relating now to our present experience? 
The presence of the pandemic has been giving us an opportunity to develop 
our ‘perception of impermanence’, the anicca-saññā, and to open our heart 
to the fragile nature of all people, all things. We are urged to turn towards 
the existential fact of our impermanence, aniccatā, fully acknowledging it,

127
BEYOND
accepting that it’s not just an unfortunate mistake but is the reality of how 
it is and how it has always been. That acknowledgement, that recognition, 
enables the heart to be in tune with reality, with nature. There’s a 
grounded realism in that, and in that realism there’s a relaxation, an ease. 
On the other hand, when we take things for granted – expecting that we’re 
going to live for many decades or that we’re going to have a comfortable 
life, we’re going to live happily ever after with the people that we like – 
then we are making foolish assumptions about life. At extraordinary 
and unfamiliar times, like this of the COVID pandemic, those foolish
assumptions are revealed.
We’ve been looking for certainty where it can’t be found. We’ve been 
depending on things that are not dependable. If we have not questioned 
or explored this, then, when it’s revealed, we are surprised: ‘No, you can’t 
depend on it. You can’t be sure of your own health; you can’t be sure there 
are going to be medical supplies; you can’t be sure there will be hospital 
beds available; you can’t be sure there are going to be enough doctors 
and nurses. It’s not a sure thing.’ We’re shocked. We feel something’s 
gone wrong. We feel it shouldn’t be this way, ‘This is unfair, how can this 
happen?!’ Our foolish assumptions are revealed to us. To recognize this 
is not being depressing, hard-hearted or malicious but appreciating how 
the ‘heavenly messengers’ of sickness and death can help us to see where

128
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
our suppositions, dependencies and expectations have formed,  what our 
mind has become accustomed to and what it has taken for granted. Once we 
know what our deluded habituations are, we can do something about them. 
Although no one in their right mind would ever wish for a pandemic like this 
to spread around the world, causing such immense damage to everybody’s 
lives, I feel this offers us a good opportunity to bring the Buddhist truths 
home, to take them to heart, to see what we have actually taken refuge in. 
What have we taken as being reliable, dependable? What have we given 
value to in our lives? What are the life goals that we’ve created for ourselves 
as individuals and as a society? What are the things that we’ve come to rely 
on? What do we assume to be true and real and good, and are those things 
trustworthy? Are they really good? Are they really true? Are they even real? 
Are they anything substantial? Or were they always superficial and fragile, 
delusory, not of true value?
Another teaching that I like to refer to in this connection, concerns 
an elderly disciple of the Buddha, Nakulapitā (S 22.1). Nakulapitā and 
Nakulamātā were a very devoted older couple, long-term dedicated 
disciples of the Buddha who had a very close connection with him. They 
had apparently been his parents again and again, in hundreds of previous 
lifetimes, so he had a close association with them. They lived at a place called 
Suṃsumāragira, at the Bhesakaḷā Grove. They would visit the Buddha quite
often and ask him questions.

129
BEYOND
One time Nakulapitā, when he was about a hundred years old, came to the 
Buddha and said, ‘I’m really agèd, decrepit. The years have accumulated 
and they are a burden to me. My body is weak and wrinkled, and my health 
is not good, my eyes and ears are wearing out. What advice can you give, 
Venerable Sir, to someone in a condition like mine, being so agèd, so 
decrepit, so worn down by decades of living?’
The Buddha’s response to Nakulapitā was, ‘It’s far better to be afflicted in 
the body and not afflicted in mind, than it is to be afflicted in mind and 
not afflicted in the body.’ He was saying that having a healthy body but an 
unhealthy mind is a great disadvantage; this is to be avoided, abandoned. 
Rather, as long as the mind has a good and skilful attitude, whether or not 
the body is sick and agèd is secondary. He went on to ask: ‘And how is one 
afflicted in body but not afflicted in mind?’ He then recounts to Nakulapitā 
the whole of the Anatta-lakkhaṇa Sutta, ‘The Discourse on Not-self ’ (S 22.59, 
MV 1.6), exploring the habits of dependency and attachment: how we look 
for certainty (niccatā), happiness (sukha) and self (attā) in the unstable 
body and mind, in the five khandhas, in this physical form and in feelings, 
perceptions, mental formations and sense-consciousness. All of them have 
the characteristics of being anicca, impermanent,  dukkha , unsatisfactory,  
and anattā , not-self. The Buddha walks Nakulapitā through all this and 
shows him that this is how, even with a decrepit body, that is very old, with

130
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
poor eyesight, poor hearing and so forth, in terms of attitude of mind, you 
can still be independent of these limitations and difficulties.
Our attitude towards experiences of sickness and ageing can be ‘unafflicted 
in mind’. We can train ourselves to regard all the aspects of our body and 
our mind, rūpa and nāma, as being intrinsically anicca, uncertain, in a state 
of change; dukkha, unsatisfactory; and anattā: they are not-self, they are not 
who or what we are. The insight that arises from seeing things in this way 
leads to true well-being – we are thereby unafflicted in mind. Such wellbeing is far more precious than having a healthy body. To have a healthy 
body but a mind that’s filled with greed, hatred and delusion, is a sorry 
state to be in.
•  •  •
In this respect I feel that, as practitioners of Buddha-Dhamma, people who 
are committed to the Buddha’s teachings, we should investigate what our 
life goals actually are. What do we really want in life? How much do we 
create a dependence on worldly factors: a healthy body; a nice place to live; 
a predictable family; a familiar community; a society that is cohesive; a 
health system that is reliable, supportive and accessible – how much do we 
take refuge in these things?
How much are our life goals focused on trying to have a comfortable, welloff life with a cozy retirement, making sure we’re going to be looked after,

131
BEYOND
with good insurance and a good retirement plan, having a dependable 
support system in place so that we won’t ever be lonely, decrepit, poor, in 
pain, sick or abandoned at the end. These are quite reasonable concerns.
In the UK, and many countries in the West, there’s a lot of provision for 
such material supports. Society in a welfare state goes to great lengths 
to make sure that people don’t suffer from hunger and isolation, that 
people are well looked-after into their old age and decrepitude. This is fine 
and admirable, it is a sign of a compassionate and thoughtful communal 
spirit. That said, if all we’re looking forward to is a comfortable place 
to stay, caring people who will look after us, and a good supply of food, 
shelter, medicine and clothing, then I would suggest that we’ve made 
our lives very limited; the potential of our human existence has been
made extremely narrow. 
Consider the advice that the Buddha gave to Nakulapitā: to be afflicted in 
body but not afflicted in mind is much better and more important than 
being afflicted in mind and not afflicted in the body. Western society is 
very materialistic. Most people in the West have no kind of spiritual goal. 
How many people have liberation or sainthood as their life goal? Or, to use 
Abraham Maslow’s terminology, ‘self-actualization’? How many people say 
that they’re aiming for enlightenment before they pass away?
Within a few spiritual groups we might consciously have such an aspiration, 
but even in many Buddhist communities in the West it’s rare to think in

132
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
these terms. The spiritual potential that we have as human beings is hardly 
talked about. There isn’t a language for it, other than in theistic circles 
where there is the prospect of possibly going to heaven when we die. 
I feel that this is one of the things that Buddha-Dhamma can help bring into 
society in the West. It is far more helpful, in terms of genuine happiness 
and fulfillment, and it is far more liberating, to appreciate our spiritual 
potential, and to develop it, setting a life goal of enlightenment, or, at 
least, of stream-entry (in Buddhist terms), rather than thinking merely in 
materialistic terms of a comfortable retirement home and a good insurance 
plan, material coziness and Radio 4 to stave off the feelings of loneliness, 
despair and lack of fulfilment at the end of our life.
If we have used our life to fulfil our spiritual potential, if we have made this 
the focus of our attention, then, as we get older, whether there is physical 
comfort or not, the heart is fine, just as the Buddha advised Nakulapitā. 
Let’s take this to heart! This is far more helpful in terms of a life plan and a 
real insurance policy. If you really want to be insured, ensured, assured, then 
realize stream-entry – that’s the very best way of being sure of happiness, 
ease and contentment. If you want to live happily ever after, don’t worry 
about the UK National Health Service or Social Services so much as about 
the state of your own heart, your own mind. What really brings the ‘happily 
ever after’ ideal to fulfillment is developing the spiritual potential that we

133
BEYOND
have, using our time, our energy, and the mental and spiritual resources 
that we have to realize enlightenment.
In this respect it’s useful to reflect on what the Buddha laid out as ‘the 
factors that support stream-entry’ (S 55.5). These were addressed in the 
previous chapter but it will be useful to explore them a bit more here as 
well. The four factors in this list, apart from their role in stream-entry, are 
valuable human qualities on their own, they help us deal with the current 
pandemic and the social distress, difficulties and anxieties that have come 
with it; they each can play a part in helping us to process the intensity of 
emotions in the people around us and within ourselves. The four factors 
supportive of stream-entry can help us to deal with the community or 
family that we’re in, the society that we’re a part of and the difficulties and 
challenges of our current situation.
The first of the four factors of stream-entry is sappurissasaṃseva which means 
‘association with good people’, ‘drawing close to good people’ . ‘Sa’ means 
good, ‘purisa’ means a person. Saṃseva is ‘association with’ or ‘drawing close 
to’. So, ‘drawing close to good people’ means to be discerning about who we 
spend our time with. If there’s a choice between being with someone who is 
‘peaceful and calm and wise and skilful’, and someone who is reactive, selfcentred, demanding, greedy or aggressive, then choose the ‘peaceful and 
calm and wise and skilful’ person. Drawing close to good people, also means

134
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
associating with those who encourage wisdom and compassion, kindness 
and equanimity. These are skilful qualities of the heart that, in others, will 
help us to similarly strengthen those qualities within ourselves. If we spend 
time with people who are anxious, fearful, agitated, aggressive, blaming 
and complaining, then it will strengthen these qualities within us. We get 
drawn into conversations with both kinds of people, and thereby their 
mindsets; we experience the results of the choices we make. If we associate 
with good-hearted, well-rounded people, sappurisa – and ‘associate’ includes 
the digital media we listen to, give our attention to, read and watch – then 
it will create a ground of ease and peace within us. Associating with good 
people brings out the best in us.
The Buddha was incredibly practical and observant. He realized that we 
are strongly affected by the people that we spend time with, just as we 
are affected by the places that we choose to go to. We are affected by the 
environment around us. If we want to cultivate wholesome qualities, if we 
want to cultivate that which is liberating and noble, then to the extent 
that one has a choice, draw close to people who embody those wholesome 
qualities and who strengthen those qualities within yourself. 
As an adjunct to this consideration, when we are spending time with others, 
bear in mind that we ourselves can be a source of those sappurisa qualities 
for the people whom we are with. If we find ourselves getting anxious,

135
BEYOND
agitated, aggressive, blaming and complaining, then we can mindfully 
reflect, ‘Do I need to fill somebody else’s mind with my anxieties? Do I need 
to express my agitated opinions? Do I need to put my aggressive, blaming 
tendencies out into the world? Do I need to give those afflictive attitudes 
energy and strength? Do I need to fill somebody else’s ears with my reactive 
patterns?’ Lo and behold, we see that we have a choice. We can choose 
to not be having that effect on other people; if we make that choice and 
restrain any divisive, deceitful or selfish urges we will see the helpful effect 
that that has on the conversation and the relationship. Being thoughtful 
and discerning company for others, drawing upon the sappurisa dimensions 
of our own hearts, is part of the way we support stream-entry.
Saddhammasavana is the second one. ‘Listening to the good Dhamma’. 
Particularly in times like this that can be distressing and difficult, what kind 
of Dhamma do we fill the mind with? What kind of information do we bring 
into our field of experience? What do we choose to give our attention and 
our time to? That saddhamma, that ‘good Dhamma’ or ‘the true Dhamma’, 
means making choices to listen to and be guided by that which is genuinely 
in tune with nature, in tune with reality. 
Again, it’s not just listening to or reading or watching things that are 
compelling or exciting, or someone vigorously asserting a particular point 
of view, whether they are a well-known spiritual teacher or a blogger

136
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
promising ‘This is the way to cure coronavirus!’ Be discerning. Where is 
this information coming from? What’s the source of this? Is this reliable? 
Is it useful for me to be putting my attention onto this? Is this helpful, is 
this liberating, or is this just more noise? Is this just a distraction? Am I 
listening to this or reading this or putting my mind onto this, just to get 
away from anxious, agitated feelings of frustration or incompleteness?’
Reflect: ‘Saddhammasavana – is this good Dhamma? Is this a wise, beneficial 
collection of words and ideas and principles, that leads to freedom from 
complication? Do these teachings lead me to peacefulness? Do they lead 
me to ease and clarity? Or do they lead my mind to more confusion, more 
tension, more conflict? What’s the result of listening, bringing my attention 
to these words?’
The third one is Yoniso-manasikāra – ‘wise reflection’, ‘skilful attention’. This 
is looking at our body, looking at our mind, our thoughts, our feelings, our 
emotions, looking at the situation we are in, looking at the community that 
we’re a part of, looking at our society, all with a circumspect, discerning 
eye. ‘Wise reflection’, means to consider the patterning of things and 
to look at things in their context, ‘What’s going on here? How does this 
work? What is a skilful choice to make with respect to this? What can be 
said that will be helpful? What can be done that will defuse this conflict? 
Is there something to be done?’ Wise reflection is using the mind’s ability

137
BEYOND
to recognize how  things work, the patterns in which nature operates, and 
to be guided by this. It is to see how things relate to each other in terms of 
cause and effect, how things interact with each other and the world. Wise 
reflection is the power of the mind to look, to explore, to investigate and to 
see how things function.
It’s not just a matter of applying thinking and memory; it is more a sense 
of freedom from presumptions, not just following the mind’s biases or 
habits of thinking. It’s not just having a clever mind, but it’s broadening the 
attitude to set aside our preferences, our habits of thinking, our emotional 
reactions of likes and dislikes, approval and disapproval. It is to clearly look 
at the whole picture in the best, unbiased, most substantial way possible. 
Sometimes, when wise reflection is applied to a situation, we ask ourselves, 
‘What’s the best thing to do here?’ and what arises is, ‘I don’t have a clue! 
What is going on?’ ‘Where does that come from? What’s that about?’ Wise 
reflection does not involve always having an answer for everything, or 
figuring everything out, but part of it is to recognize that sometimes what’s 
going on, how it works is not knowable – like a foggy night, we can’t see 
and no amount of blinking or lamplight will help. It’s foggy! Wise reflection 
can mean that we know that we don’t know. That can be a wise perspective, 
telling us that, ‘Right now it’s not clear where these feelings come from,’ 
so let’s not fill up the unknown with a fixed plan or a belief. Wisdom says, 
‘Leave this as unknown for now.’

138
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Thus, part of wise reflection is letting the mysterious be mysterious. You 
don’t have to fill up the unknown with an opinion or an explanation, 
but instead you say, ‘Well, I don’t know what that’s about, but here it 
is.’ There may be a situation where someone is very agitated or upset 
and they come to ask you for help. You may think, ‘Well, I’d love to be 
able to help this person but I haven’t got a clue what to say in order to 
be of real benefit. I don’t know where they’re coming from, I don’t have 
an answer for the question that they’re asking.’ So wise reflection is 
also being ready to say, ‘I don’t know,’ or, ‘I can’t help,’ or, ‘I don’t know 
what this is about,’ as well as the times where wise reflection does bring 
a clear answer or a clear interpretation, a recognition of how things
are working together.
The fourth of the four factors supportive of stream-entry is dhammānudhamma-paṭipatti – ‘practising Dhamma in accordance with Dhamma’. 
This is pointing to what we think of as practising Dhamma: keeping the 
Precepts, practising meditation, practising Right Speech, Right Action, 
Right Livelihood, ‘doing Dhamma things’ as it were, and how easy it 
is for such practices to unwittingly be based on an attitude fuelled by 
self-view, desire, fear, aversion or just habit. ‘Practising Dhamma in 
accordance with Dhamma’ means that the effort to practise Dhamma 
is free from self-view and conceit, free from the influences of greed,
hatred and delusion.

139
BEYOND
This is not easy to do. We can put on our robes, shave our head, follow the 
routine or r ecite Buddhaṃ saranaṃ gacchāmi , we can follow the Dhamma 
forms, but we can do this solely out of habit. We can do it because, ‘I’m 
a Buddhist monk so this is what I wear,’ or ‘These are the words that we 
chant. That’s the custom, the form.’ But as Luang Por Chah would say, it’s 
like a fruit, like a mango or a banana. If you are only following the external 
form, it’s just like the skin of the mango or the banana. The reason why 
these fruits are valuable or important is the actual flesh of the fruit that can 
be eaten, that can nourish us. The skin is there to help protect and contain 
it. If you eat mango skins or banana skins and ignore the flesh of these 
fruits, it gives you bad indigestion, they don’t taste good and you receive 
no nourishment either.
It’s this way if we are practising Dhamma not in accordance with Dhamma. 
We can be following the form, doing ‘Dhamma things’ like reciting the 
Precepts and keeping the Precepts, wearing the robes and following the 
routine, and doing the meditation forms, but if that’s driven by, ‘I’m doing 
this because I should do this, it’s expected of me,’ or ‘If I do this then I’m 
going to be happy in the future. If I follow this formula then I’ll realize 
stream-entry. I’m an unenlightened person now and if I do this, then I’m 
going to become enlightened in the future. There’ll be an enlightened me 
rather than an unenlightened me, and that’s highly desirable. That’s what

140
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
I really want, to be an enlightened me.’ If such self-view is embedded in 
the attitude, if our practice, our efforts, are driven by these elements of 
self-centredness or fear or habit or obligation, then it can’t lead to genuine 
liberation. It’s only if our actions, our speech and all our efforts are in tune 
with Dhamma – free from I-making and mine-making, free from māna, 
conceit, and self-view, and are instead motivated and guided by mindfulness and wisdom – that they will lead to liberation.
•  •  •
If we reflect skilfully in relation to this current pandemic, then we will not 
think of it as something that disrupts our lives and which is an obstruction 
to the practice. If our attitude is skilful and we use the opportunity of the 
changes to our routines to recognize the fragility of our lives and of the 
lives of all those around us, we can use the situation to consciously develop 
pāramitā, spiritual qualities, and the supports for stream-entry. We can 
manifest the attributes of a sappurisa, a good-hearted, well-rounded person, 
to be more thoughtful about whom we keep company with and the kind of 
words that we put into the world; we can consider carefully, as well, what 
we attend to, what we listen to; we can cultivate wise reflection; and we 
can cultivate the practice of Dhamma in accordance with Dhamma. In this 
way, even though the current pandemic might be disruptive to our normal

141
BEYOND
routines, the situation itself can be turned to be of benefit, can be turned 
to great advantage.
It’s a strange thing, but often in human society it’s the times of greatest 
difficulty and distress, even being in a war, that bring out the most powerful 
positive human qualities in us; unselfishness, generosity and compassion 
come to the fore. I often listened to the stories that my mother and my 
father told about going through the Second World War in the British Army. 
They were in different places and they didn’t meet until the War was over. 
My mother was an army driver in the Blitz in London and then, shortly 
after D-Day, she was over in France and Germany with the Allied Army 
progressing into the continent. Even though it was a war – with the incredible 
distress and massive quantities of unskilful behaviour that go with that, 
death being caused all around on a daily basis – the extraordinary acts of 
kindness, generosity and compassion between people were really striking. 
In such a tragic situation great pāramitā, spiritual virtues, are called forth 
in having to deal with these kinds of difficulties, dealing with the fragile 
nature of human life. You’re sitting down with someone at supper in the 
mess hall and you don’t know if either of you are going to be alive the next 
morning. Life and death, the heavenly messengers, are close and, because 
of that, the qualities of kindness, generosity, compassion, unselfishness, are 
strengthened, fortified and brought firmly to the fore. Not just my parents,

142
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
but oftentimes older people around me would reflect, ‘We treated each other 
so much better when there was a war on. We’ve become selfish and greedy
and lazy now that it’s peacetime again.’
Again, I am not praising war in any way! And I’m not wishing the pandemic 
to continue or to cause more havoc. Rather this is a reflection that, during 
challenging times like this, when our usual values are shaken up, when the 
situation doesn’t allow us to be so complacent, then this can be a situation 
where our noblest and most valuable spiritual qualities are brought to the 
fore. All around, during this pandemic, there have been examples of great 
and beautiful gestures being made: qualities of compassion, people looking 
out for ways to help each other; qualities of equanimity, people being calm 
and steady in the midst of agitation and turbulence; people being unselfish, 
sharing the things that they have, to support communal well-being. It has 
already been an extraordinary opportunity for those wholesome qualities 
to be developed.
I saw a news report about a couple who have a little shop, in Lothian in 
Scotland. People had been buying up gallons and gallons of hand sanitizer 
to sell at high prices, so this couple were giving away toilet paper and hand 
sanitizer for free to all the older people in their area. I thought, ‘Good 
for you!’ They’re small shopkeepers, and they need to make a living like 
anybody else, but they’re ready to give away these essential supplies for

143
BEYOND
free. How noble, how beautiful that is: rising up in a stressful situation with 
acts of kindness and thoughtfulness, recognizing that there are important 
values beyond one’s personal gain, one’s own benefit.
We don’t know how long the pandemic will last. Whether it’s long or short, 
right now we can use this opportunity to see what the mind is making 
of the situation. Is the mind going towards fear and aversion? Is it going 
towards imagining the future after it’s all over? Is it focused upon personal 
concerns or irritations and opinions: ‘We shouldn’t do this! We should do 
that! This is right! That’s wrong! I want this! I don’t want that!’ ‘What’s 
going to happen? How’s it going to work? What’s going to…?’ 
All of these projections and the emotional surges that so easily arise... use 
Dhamma practice to know them, to explore them, to wisely reflect upon 
them. We use exactly those kinds of reactive patterns to reflect on, ‘What 
am I looking at? What am I taking refuge in? Am I taking refuge in Buddha, 
Dhamma and Sangha or am I taking refuge in wished-for predictability, in 
hoped-for physical health? Am I taking refuge in the ideas of certainty, of 
comfort, of physical security? What’s my mind taking refuge in?’ Look at 
that, explore that, and see how the more that the mind tries to take refuge 
in the five khandhas, the more it creates the causes for disappointment 
and dukkha. The more that the mind takes refuge in awakened awareness,

144
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
in reality and in goodness, in Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha, the more it 
generates peace, ease and freedom as the result.
This is an excellent opportunity to see where the mind habitually takes 
refuge; if it is in worldly concerns then we train it instead to take refuge 
in Dhamma, in the reality of the way things are, in Buddha, the quality of 
wakeful awareness, in Sangha, the quality of rejoicing in goodness, choosing 
the wholesome – then we see what the result of our shift of focus is. 
We are guided by instinct in the ways we protect the body; the way that 
we fit into society; the way that we exist within our immediate family or 
community, or the broader human family. These are powerful instinctual 
imperatives that work in the mind, with respect to food, shelter, safety and 
so forth. Look at these instincts. Look at how the mind tries to take refuge 
in shelter, in clothing, in food, in medicine, in predictability, in a caring and 
protective society – look at these habits. We are always looking for security 
in that which is not secure, we are looking for reliability in that which is 
not reliable. Look at this habit. Look at these tendencies, don’t be afraid to 
turn towards them and enquire, ‘Are they reliable? Are they dependable?’
The mind is trying to take refuge in sight, sound, smell, taste, touch and 
thinking. It’s trying to take refuge in material forms, in feelings, perceptions, 
mental formations, sense-consciousness. They are not dependable. They’re 
not reliable. They’re not stable. If we try to take refuge in that which is not

145
BEYOND
a permanent refuge, look what happens. If we try to depend on that which 
is not dependable, look what happens.
This investigation then supports a change of view, the gotrabhū, the 
‘change of lineage’. That change constitutes stream-entry: we are no longer 
identifying with the body, the mind or the personality, but are instead 
allowing our mind to know its own nature as Dhamma. 
The mind is Dhamma, it’s not a person, it’s not a thing. When that ‘change 
of lineage’, that change of view, is established then security, stability, 
‘freedom from reliance’, the freedom not to depend on any conditioned 
thing, is known directly. That’s why the Three Refuges are called ‘Refuges’. 
They are a safe place. The mind stops looking for security where it can’t 
be found. It looks instead for security in what is really reliable, in what is 
secure, in what is dependable, which is the Dhamma itself. 
I have written these words to encourage this change of view. If each of 
us works to establish this realization, we will see that the ‘happily ever 
after’ dream, the aspiration to peace, ease and fulfilment, is only  realizable 
through our own inner transformation. There is no other way. If we really 
want to live happily ever after, then the realization of Dhamma, this 
embodying of Dhamma, is the only way that this aspiration can be fulfilled, 
I would suggest.

HAPPILY EVER AFTER
VOLUME FIVE • BEYOND
AJAHN AMARO
2024 © AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS
AMARAVATI BUDDHIST MONASTERY
ST MARGARETS
GREAT GADDESDEN
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD
HERTFORDSHIRE HP1 3BZ
HAPPILY EVER AFTER SERIES ISBN: 978-1-78432-206-9 
VOLUME 5 ISBN: 978-1-78432-205-2
ILLUSTRATION ‘GO NOT KNOWING WHERE, TAKE NOT KNOWING WHAT, STAY-THE WAY UNKNOWN’
BY AJAHN THITADHAMMO
COVER AND TEXT DESIGN AND FORMATTING: NICHOLAS HALLIDAY . HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
ANY TRANSLATION OF THIS TEXT MUST BE DERIVED FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH.
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT, TRANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN
ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA PLEASE CONTACT AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS AT
PUBLICATIONS@AMARAVATI.ORG
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE EBOOK AT FSBOOKS.ORG
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
 
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT
HTTP:/ /CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND
THIS EDITION PRINTED IN THE UK, 2024

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit: creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
YOU ARE FREE TO
• Copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format.
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• ATTRIBUTION:  You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license,
 and indicate if changes were made.
You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests
the licensor endorses you or your use.
• NON-COMMERCIAL: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• NO DERIVATIVES:  If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
 you may not distribute the modified material.
• NO ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS: You may not apply legal terms or technological
 measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.
NOTICES
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the
public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions
necessary for your intended use.
For example, other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit
how you use the material.
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the
license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material
in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as
publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.

REALITY
EMOTION
PEOPLE
MONEY
BEYOND