Dedication
This booklet has been sponsored
for free distribution by generous
supporters in Malaysia
with gratitude and respect
for the Forest Sangha.
Vassa /two.OT/zero.OT/one.OT/zero.OT

Free Distribution of Dhamma
This free booklet has been made available through the faith, eﬀort
and generosity of people who wish to share the understanding it
contains with whoever is interested. This free oﬀering is itself a part
of what makes this a Dhamma-publication, a book based on
spiritual values. Please don’t sell this book. If you no longer need it,
pass it on to an interested person. If you wish to help such
publications to continue to be made freely available, please contact
your nearest Forest Sangha monastery.
Published by Aruna Publications
c© Forest Sangha Publications 2010
www.aruno.org

True but not right, right but not true
from a talk given by Luang Por Sumedho
at the Leicester Summer School, /one.OT/nine.OT/nine.OT/five.OT

I F W E T H I N K A B O U TDhamma practice in terms of
accomplishing something, we create an image that we then
try to realise. However, what I recommend is to just trust in
the attentiveness of the mind, in mindfulness, and let go of
the desire to ﬁnd or grasp anything. Consciousness is still
there, and sensitivity – but it’s not experienced in terms of
being a person. There’s just awareness of what is happening –
of what the feeling is, or of the mood that one is experiencing in this moment. We can call this intuitive awareness.
It’s not programmed and conditioned by thought or memory
or perception.
However, as soon as we think about ourselves, how we are
and what we are, we become a person. In fact, one of the big
problems in meditation is of reinforcing a sense of self

through taking ourselves too seriously. You know, we can see
ourselves as religious people dedicated towards serious
things, such as realising truth. We feel important. We are not
just frivolous ordinary people who go shopping in the
supermarket and watch television . . . And of course this
seriousness can have advantages; it might encourage us to
give up foolish activities for more meaningful ones. But it can
also lead to arrogance and conceit: a sense of being someone
who has special moral precepts or some altruistic goal, or
even of having come onto the planet as some kind of
messiah!
This conceit can make us take ourselves so seriously that we
lose all perspective. It’s a problem in monastic life too. We
can become incredibly serious about our moral purity, our
discipline, our dedication and so on. But one way of looking
at religious conventions, such as those of Theravada
Buddhism – where the emphasis is on the Vinaya discipline,
practising meditation and the purity of the tradition – is that

they contain concepts that are ‘true but not right, right but
not true.’
For example, one time I went to see a teacher who said that
we don’t need the discipline or the Vinaya rules: ‘All you have
to do is be mindful. Mindfulness is enough.’ So I went back
and told Ajahn Chah, and he said, ‘True but not right, right
but not true.’ Because, ultimately, we don’t need rules, just
being mindful is the Way. But most of us don’t start from an
enlightened perspective, so we have to use expedient means
to contemplate and to develop mindfulness. The meditation
techniques, disciplinary rules and so on are necessary as tools
to support reﬂection and mindfulness.
The ﬁve moral precepts provide a standard for the establishment of mindfulness in terms of actions and speech. They
will help us to be mindful. Whereas the idea of being free and
doing whatever we want so long as we are mindful – that’s
just an ideal, isn’t it? It’s a ‘true but not right, right but not
true’ problem: it’s true, but not necessarily right all the time.

If we grasp such an idea, we can condone anything. For
example, one can be very mindful while robbing a bank or
performing the perfect murder. However, without a moral
standard to reﬂect upon it is simply the mindfulness of an
animal in danger of being caught.
This also applies to situations where we are right on the edge
of death – like mountain climbing. We forget about ourselves
and our problems, we are automatically right with the
moment. There is a kind of exhilaration in that state of mind
because we are far from the dreariness and greyness of daily
life. Our consciousness becomes concentrated and onepointed. However we can’t always live life on the edge. Most
of our life is not particularly exciting. It just is what it is. We
do ordinary things. We eat food, we take baths, we get
dressed, undressed, we have to cook, wash the dishes, feed
the cat, go to work, and get along with our spouse, our
children, our fellow workers.
Similarly, meditation is not an extreme or dangerous

experience that forces us to be mindful. We usually meditate
in places that are safe. We sit, stand, walk or lie down, and we
contemplate the breathing of the body. It’s ordinary. Of
course sometimes in meditation we do experience a moment, or several moments, of complete calm and peacefulness
in the mind. And we think, ‘I want this!’. . . But of course it
goes. Then the next day when we go to meditate, we try to
get it back – but we can’t, because we’re trying to get
something we remember, rather than trusting and letting
things fall away according to their true nature. The real aim
then is one of simply observing our habitual tendencies as
conditions that arise and cease.
In this observant state, repressed fears and emotional states
can rise up to the surface of the mind; but rather than going
oﬀ and doing some distracting thing to avoid them, we begin
to give such states conscious recognition. We become more
and more willing to allow what we do not like or want into
consciousness and, through that willingness to see it, let go

of it. We abandon it, relinquishing that state – not through
suppressing it, but through leaving it alone.
The religious life is a life of renunciation in which we
renounce, abandon and let go of things. To the worldly mind,
‘renunciation’ might sound as though we’re getting rid of
something, or condemning the sense world, rejecting it
because we see it as evil or wrong. But renunciation isn’t a
moral judgement against anything. Rather, it’s a moving
away from that which complicates and makes life diﬃcult,
towards the ultimate simplicity of pure mindfulness in the
present moment. Because enlightenment is here and now;
the Truth is now. There isn’t anyone who can become
anything. There isn’t anyone who is born or who will die,
there is only this eternal now. This awareness now is what we
can tune into, as we let go of the appearances and the
habitual tendencies, and incline towards this simple reﬂection on the present.
Now we say this and we can understand it and it sounds quite

simple, but the tendency of the mind is to make it into a
problem. We don’t have the faith or the trust or the
willingness to totally let go in the moment. So the statement ‘enlightenment is now’ can bring a feeling of
uncertainty or bewilderment. Also, there are diﬀerent ideas
about enlightenment. Is it instant or gradual? Is it
‘enlightenment is now’ or something that comes around
gradually, stage by stage, lifetime by lifetime? Both of these
are true but not right, right but not true. They are just
diﬀerent ways of contemplating and reﬂecting on the
experience of the moment.
The idea of instant enlightenment is very appealing to the
mind: one LSD tablet and we’re there – without having to go
through a monastic training or give up anything at all. Instant
enlightenment! But we have to recognise the limitation of
thought. Take the word ‘enlightenment’ itself. Maybe we see
it as some fantastic experience in which we are taken over by
the light and totally transformed from a selﬁsh, deluded

being into a completely wise one. We might see ‘enlightenment’ as something very grand – and seemingly
unattainable. Many of us feel that we cannot reach such a
high state, because our view around our personality is
negative. We tend to emphasise our faults, weaknesses, and
bad habits, and these are then seen as obstructions to
enlightenment.
This is the delusion of operating from a personality view. We
regard meditation as something I am doing, or something I
have got to do. We think, ‘I am somebody who has to do this.
When I reach this state, then I can go on to do that.’ We can
follow meditation guidelines with the idea of attaining and
achieving diﬀerent levels of realisation – just like getting a
university degree. Intelligent and well-educated westerners
who become monks or nuns within the Theravada tradition
do tend to interpret the Holy Life in terms of attainment,
such as attaining stream entry (sotapanna). The conditioned
thinking mind conceives of such a realisation as a personal

attainment – of having done something that someone else
has not done.
Actually there is a rule within our monastic tradition that
prohibits us from announcing our attainments. In Thailand,
people would say that Ajahn Chah was an arahant – though
he never said so – but then people would see him smoking a
cigarette, and they’d think, ‘Arahants wouldn’t smoke cigarettes, he couldn’t be anarahant!’ The mind tends to have an
idea of an arahant as a reﬁned, goody-good person who’d
never do anything coarse, and is always perfect in what they
say and how they live. We want them to be perfect for us; so
when we see these ﬂaws up against the ideal which we are
projecting onto them, we become critical, disappointed,
disillusioned and dismissive. But this is a function of our
mind. We are creating our own arahants. Then if one of
them, or our teacher, does something which is contrary to
what we think should be done, we feel upset or disappointed.
On the other hand, we may try to ward oﬀ the doubt by

justifying their behaviour: ‘He can behave like that because
he is an enlightened being.’ However what we can do is to
observe the whole process of projection, of our creation of an
ideal person. We begin to see how it is just an ideal. Then if
we keep to this practice of mindfulness, we see that it’s not
up to us to make a categorical moral judgement about other
people or about our teachers. It’s not our business to judge
them as good or bad. And that’s a relief. We can simply listen
and be aware of our own conditioned reactions to what we
are experiencing.
Then we learn: when we emphasise our personality we create
problems, because the personal qualities are diﬀerent for
each one of us. We have our common human problems: old
age, sickness and death; but then there are attitudes, cultural
expectations and assumptions wherein we diﬀer, and these
are conditioned into the mind after we are born. Because of
this, I often say to people, ‘Whatever you think you are, that’s
not what you are.’ The personality, the self-consciousness,

the fears and the desires of the mind are what they are. In
Dhamma practice, we are not trying to dismiss them or add
to them, or make any problems or diﬃculties around them.
We are willing to let them be what they are. They feel this
way, they have this quality; they arise and cease. And in that
cessation, there’s the realisation of the peace, the bliss and
the serenity of just being – and there’s no self in it. We
describe it as seeing the Dhamma, the way it is – it’s not a
matter of becoming anything at all. Everyone has this
potential, the ability to realise this.
The aim of Buddhist meditation then, is to let go of the
conditions of the mind. This doesn’t mean denying, getting
rid of, or judging them. It means not believing them or
following them. Instead we listen to them as Dhamma, as
conditions of the mind that arise and cease. We learn to trust
in just being the listener, the watcher, with an attitude of
awakened, attentive awareness, rather than be somebody
trying to meditate to get some kind of result. Then through

mindfulness we are able to get beyond this conditioning of
the mind to the pure consciousness that isn’t conditioned,
but which is like the background, the emptiness, the blank
sheet on which words are written. Our perceptions arise and
cease on that blank sheet, that emptiness.
So contemplate this process. As we begin to listen and watch
more – rather than just trying to get some concentrated
samadhi states that we read about in books – as we relax, and
watch and listen, then we have a much greater possibility of
discovering that emptiness, that non-self. This is called
‘relinquishment’ or ‘abandonment.’ Such terms can sound
heavy to the worldly mind – but the practice is not one of
annihilation or destruction. Rather, it’s a willingness to let
things go, to allow things to be what they are and let them
cease. In other words to not hold on or identify with anything, but rather to trust in that pure state of aware attentiveness in the present moment. It’s not that we’ve got to do
something, or become anything at all.

Without that pressure, without that compulsiveness of the
mind, we can learn from life itself. We understand Dhamma –
the way it is – so we’re no longer creating or projecting all
kinds of fears, desires and endless demands onto any other
person or the world we live in. We do the best we can, but we
no longer have to feel endlessly disappointed or critical,
because we have the faith, the trust and the wisdom to learn
from the experiences of life as they occur. We grow old, we
experience the loss of loved ones, or the ageing process of
the body, and there’s the ﬁnal moment of the death of the
body. But rather than thinking, ‘I was born,’ or ‘I will die,’ we
can get behind these kinds of thoughts through noting them
as just conditions of the mind. Then we no longer hold onto
any speciﬁc attitude.
This process breaks down the illusion of being a human body,
or a man or a woman, or a personality – and there is just that
purity of consciousness. Of course we will forget, the old
habits will come back and take us over, but we know now

that we don’t have to ﬁght or resist them or make problems
around them. We learn how to let them go. We incline
towards developing skilful means for dealing with our
obsessions. Then wisdom is operating, and we learn how to
use the conventions of Theravada Buddhism for realisation,
rather than just hanging on to techniques and views.
Evam