# Reconfigurations

By the beginning of 1978, Ajahn Sumedho had departed Thailand and was engaged in establishing a branch monastery in Britain. The tall American ex-helicopter pilot who was skilled in crochet, Ajahn Pabhakaro, had been asked by Tan Ajahn Chah to take over leading the community at Wat Pah Nanachat.

Around the beginning of 1978 a young, energetic, smiley English fellow called Jeremy had arrived and was expressing interest in joining the community. One morning, when he was diligently using a machete to chop wood at the kitchen, he accidentally missed the piece of wood and instead hacked into his foot. The reason I remember the incident is because it fell to me to accompany him to see a doctor. In fact I ended up physically carrying him into the local hospital. Jeremy was one of those visitors who did settle in and make a commitment. He eventually received upasampada from Tan Ajahn Chah and the sangha at Wat Pah Pong and was given the name Amaro Bhikkhu.

Later that year, I entered another hospital, this time as a patient for knee surgery. The difficulty with my knees was likely due mainly to my motorbike accident, combined with other possible causes such as hours of forcing myself to sit on the floor without a cushion. I had gone to Bangkok to see if there was anything that could be done about the increasing amount of pain I was having with my knees, and the advice I received was that I needed a meniscectomy. In those days that amounted to open surgery on both legs, and resulted in my being in Ramathibodi hospital with both legs in full length plaster casts for several weeks. Once the casts had been removed it became apparent that the excessive growth of scar tissue had caused both knee joints to seize up, requiring two more sessions of general anaesthetic so the scar tissue could be torn. That was an ordeal I would not want to have to repeat. Initially I had been told by the doctor that having both knees done at the same time might mean being incapacitated for something like three or four weeks. As it happened it was many weeks.

To my surprise, one day as I lay in bed in the hospital, I received a visitor; it was ex-Tan Jotiko, now calling himself Mason Hamilton. When Ajahn Sumedho had gone to live in Britain the then Tan Jotiko had gone to live at another, rather remote branch monastery called Wat Keurn. It wasn’t long, however, before he took the decision to renounce his commitment to the robes and return to lay life. Of course, I was sad to see my friend in this new form, but as far as I recall that it wasn’t too big a deal. Tan Varapañño had already disrobed by that time, so the perception wasn’t new, and finding myself stuck all alone in a Bangkok hospital for weeks on end meant that I was already dealing with plenty of disappointment; this was just a bit more.

Mason was staying with Geoff, an English friend and supporter of Wat Pah Nanachat, and by the time I emerged from hospital the two of them had organized a trip up to the north of Thailand, to Chiangmai. There we would have the use of a quiet secluded house on the side of a forested hill.

Before departing on that trip I had a chance to pay my respects to Tan Ajahn Chah, who himself was in hospital in Bangkok. Seeing him again meant a great deal. Having been for such a long time away from the mother ship and its captain, it was encouraging to see Tan Ajahn Chah once more. My knees were still not very flexible, so when I attempted to get down on the floor to bow, I was particularly awkward. I started telling Tan Ajahn Chah, ‘It shouldn’t be this way. The doctors said it would only take a few weeks and here I am after all this time and my knees are still not working properly.’ He looked at me sternly, and with an almost surprised expression at the degree of my foolishness said, ‘What do you mean it shouldn’t be this way? If it shouldn’t be this way it wouldn’t be this way!’ That was helpful. Thank you, Tan Ajahn Chah. He wasn’t implying anything like there being a big plan and that the universe was teaching me a lesson; he was simply saying there are causes and conditions for it to be this way, so stop resisting reality. It is like this! Such resistance only makes things worse.

Mason, Geoff and I had a splendid road trip. The house on the side of the hill, Doi Suthep, was Japanese-style and was surrounded by gorgeous gardens and forest. Nearby was a waterfall that we could easily walk to. During the day Geoff would sometimes drive us around to see some of the sights, and at night it was quiet – no more of the noise and fumes of Bangkok traffic. That interlude was refreshing and renewing; thank you, Geoff.

On one of those trips out, Geoff, Mason and I went as far as the next province, Chiang Rai, where there was a small hermitage monastery associated with Wat Pah Pong, called Wat Udom Waree. The abbot there was Ajahn Koon, a short, young, enthusiastic and incredibly talkative monk. Besides the welcome we received, there was a nearby thermal hot pool where I was able to soak my still painful limbs. Ajahn Koon generously invited me to stay there for the approaching Rains Retreat (pansah) and the thought of having access to the thermal spring clinched it for me.

It was appropriate that I return to Wat Pah Nanachat to get permission to be away for the Rains. By the time I reached there, there had been another change in leadership. Now Ajahn Jagaro had been put in charge. He was an Australian whose family were of Italian descent and he had a big warm heart. He didn’t hesitate to draw lines when they were needed, but he did so with a warmth and sensitivity that commanded love and respect from the community. There seemed to be no hesitation in giving me permission to return to Chiang Rai province in the North.