# What Next?

Unexpectedly, when the retreat ended, I discovered that not everyone seemed as amazed as I was at what had just happened. Most of the participants appeared keen to get back to what they were like before, doing what they did before; talking a lot, hugging a lot. Was I missing something? That initial taste of tranquillity did serve to heighten my sensitivities. When a vehicle drove past on the road, the stench of the exhaust fumes struck me as powerfully offensive. On the way back to the commune, when I stopped at a store to purchase some goods, I felt disturbed by the evident lifelessness of the staff. My first real encounter with practising the teachings of the Buddha had a profound effect on me; however, I can’t say I had a very good understanding of what it meant to go for refuge to the Dhamma, to Reality. It would be a while before I understood that heightened sensitivities alone were not enough.

Once I arrived back at Narada, at least some of the community members there picked up on my enthusiasm and expressed an interest in learning meditation. It wasn’t long before a retreat had been organized to take place at a dome not far down the valley. Ajahn Khantipalo had agreed that, after the series of retreats at Nimbin had finished, he would lead one for the Mullumbimby communities. The dome in which we would be gathering belonged to a couple who ran a business bottling essential oils. He was Australian and she was Maori from New Zealand. I liked that they had made their place available.

As it happened, the joyous anticipation I felt at the thought of sharing the amazing opportunity meditation offered, was naive. The whole occasion felt like I had invited my friends to a party, only for them to all turn up late and then leave obviously underwhelmed. I didn’t get it: why couldn’t they see the significance of this? We all shared a sense of disillusionment with the world as it was; we all wanted to make a difference. Here was a way that could potentially make a massive difference. It didn’t involve taking unemployment money from the government, didn’t involve imbibing substances; all it required was upgrading our level of integrity and learning to skilfully focus attention.

The disappointment I experienced didn’t deter me from keeping my own meditation practice going. Up on the ridge, in my small canvas, bamboo and plastic dwelling, I would spend hours sitting. There were periods of exquisite delight that I would never have imagined possible. I discovered an ability to focus attention on something such as the bark of a tree, and it would trigger a rush of bliss up through my body. Who would have thought that simply applying concentrated attention on the natural rhythm of breathing in and out, or slowly walking up and down on a track in the forest, could give rise to such joy. It was totally legal and available to everyone. What a revelation! Around that time I read a copy of Alan Watts’ Nature, Man and Woman which revealed more new, inspiring perspectives. This was not about accumulating information: this felt like recovering from an illness.

Ajahn Khantipalo had recommended that we read a book called, The Life of the Buddha by Ven. Ñanamoli. Somehow I managed to acquire a copy (this was very many years before Amazon, internet and mobile phones) but trying to read it reminded me of the difficulties I had at university. It was a struggle to make my mind follow the text, and that struggle got in the way of accessing the meaning. I have never been tested for dyslexia so I don’t know if there is something odd about how my brain is wired, or if I am just mentally lazy. Or perhaps there are other explanations. I do know my mind seems to operate somewhat faster than some other people, and the struggle I have with reading seems to have to do with the effort it takes to slow down. I gave up trying to read that book, and emphasized instead the sitting and walking.

It wasn’t long before it became obvious I wasn’t going to fit in at Narada; I no longer wanted to fit in there. The fantasy that was currently occupying my imagination was travelling to Asia. I had very little money and no concrete plan – just felt drawn to travelling out further into the world. Contrary to what most spiritual seekers were advocating, I had no inclination to go to India. Yes, that is where the Buddha was from, and it is where Ram Dass had found his teacher, Neem Karoli Baba, but it didn’t interest me. I felt drawn more in the direction of Japan. Perhaps, I thought, I could get work teaching English along the way and somehow just wing it – start off hitchhiking to Darwin in the Northern Territories of Australia, get a cheap flight to Portuguese Timor, island-hop my way through the archipelago of Indonesia, and then on up via Malaysia to Thailand. Ajahn Khantipalo received his monastic training in a monastery in Bangkok so that could be a good point to head for. Then perhaps on to Japan – where if I was lucky, I might be able to rub shoulders with some Zen monks and pick up a few tips on gardening – before taking the Trans-Siberian railway from Vladivostok to Europe, ending up in England, or the Mother Country as we had been brought up to think of her.

I wasn’t so thoroughly naive as to think I could do all that without some money so I went back down to Sydney to work for a few months. There I met up again with some friends I had met earlier, and made new friends. The enthusiasm that stemmed from my meditation practice gave rise to a lot of energy and confidence. I expect I might have been rather evangelical about the whole thing and could have even put potential meditators off by my exuberance.

Work which paid well enough wasn’t difficult to find even though it was thoroughly uninspiring. The whole experience of living with and working with people who had no interest in spiritual matters was draining. I was learning the lesson that mindfulness and concentration were not the same thing. At least for a while I was still able to focus concentrated attention and temporarily access an inner space of ease. I recall stopping on my way to work, and staring into a flower that was overhanging a garden wall, until once again the bliss-rush through my body was triggered. What I didn’t understand was that, regardless of whatever else was going on, I was blindly indulging in pleasurable sensations.

Confusing the function of concentration with that of mindfulness is a mistake regularly made by those starting out in meditation, especially if through concentration they access a degree of happiness. Whether or not that point had been made clear enough to me when I first received teachings on meditation I can’t recall. Similarly, I don’t know if the importance of sila or integrity was sufficiently emphasized. Perhaps those aspects of the training were explained but I wasn’t interested in them. Through applying the meditation technique I had developed some increased sensitivity, however I was desperately short on restraint. As time went by in Sydney, my mood deteriorated and gradually I lost the brightness and confidence I had brought with me from Narada.

At one particularly painful point I found myself making a vow that, ‘if ever I find myself in a position of teaching meditation, I will emphasize precepts.’ Now, forty-eight years later, I regularly speak about how utterly essential sila (integrity) and indriya samvara (sense restraint) are in practice. Without them we leave ourselves vulnerable. Too much intensity and sensitivity without the protection and stability that comes with sila can be very dangerous.