# The Forest Sangha Calendar

When we had received word that our teacher, Tan Ajahn Chah, might not be with us much longer, it occurred to me that we could mark the occasion with a pictorial calendar – something that could be printed and distributed around the world to the increasing number of branch monasteries and their supporters.

In part, my motivation was to find a beautiful way of honouring the life of our teacher. Also, in equal part, it was to produce something that would offer the extended community of lay disciples of Tan Ajahn Chah a sense of belonging. We all benefit from feeling like we belong somewhere, and if that somewhere is a spiritual community for which we have respect, then all the better. It seemed to me that having a calendar hung on the wall throughout the entire year, one that you could look at regularly and be reminded of the community of which you were a part, would be beneficial. A young fellow called Pete, who was frequenting Chithurst in those days and was a graphic designer, kindly offered to assist me in compiling such a calendar.

This was the beginning of the annual Forest Sangha calendar[1] that has been produced each year, except one, since 1990. The design has altered somewhat over the years, and the production and distribution has changed, but as far as I can tell, the function has remained much the same. It has been a privilege and a pleasure to have been involved in this project all these years. I say ‘involved’, because it depends on many more people besides myself to produce it. The final selection of photos and quotes has been my contribution, but I have had the assistance of a good number of others when it comes to design, layout, printing and distribution. The process of acquiring the astronomical (and astrological) dates for many years depended on when the royal palace in Thailand would release them. These days, thanks to an algorithm skilfully generated by Tan Gambhiro and colleagues, we are able to calculate the dates with excellent accuracy, without having to wait to hear from others. Initially the calendars were printed in this country and shipped abroad. For many years now, thanks to the generosity of the Kataññuta Group in Malaysia, they have been printed and distributed from there.

Not everyone in our sangha agrees with my personal preference (influenced by Marshall McLuhan’s The Medium is the Message) for black and white images, and my view that they more effectively communicate the message, ‘less is more’. The world is intoxicated, in my opinion, with excess sensory stimuli. The idea of producing a full-colour calendar could be tempting in the same way that over-eating of cakes and cookies could be tempting. Our message, as far as I am concerned, is: if we are seeking clarity and contentment, either as a samana or as a householder, then simplification is what is called for – not proliferation. This is one of the central themes in the teachings of Tan Ajahn Chah, as I understand them. It is not merely a matter of aesthetics (although I acknowledge that is a factor).

Then there have been a variety of opinions about the sort of photos to publish. The first year consisted exclusively of images of Tan Ajahn Chah. If we had continued doing that, it could have fed into the notion some people had that we were a sort of cult. For a while it seemed that nice pictures of nature would be a good way of representing the Forest Sangha. One year we used images of shrines in the various branch monasteries. On occasion I would receive an objection because somebody didn’t think a photo I had selected looked quite right. Then there have been requests that we have more photos of monks’ and nuns’ faces; at other times, requests that there be less photos of faces. For many years now the photos have simply been of people doing things in monasteries. Since we regularly receive messages of appreciation, and this year, 2020, over 12,000 copies were printed, it must still be serving a useful purpose.

Selecting suitable photos for these calendars is always fun; however, an equally rewarding part of the project is finding the ‘just right’ Dhamma quote: one that resonates with the image. In the early years we used extracts from translated teachings of Tan Ajahn Chah. More recently we have been alternating, year by year, Tan Ajahn Chah’s teachings with verses from the Dhammapada. When our efforts are successful, the image generates an atmosphere that makes users of the calendar susceptible to the message contained within the Dhamma quote.

Towards the end of 1990, I was told that I would be moving to Northumberland to take over leadership of the community at Harnham. With the development of more branch monasteries in Britain, Switzerland, Italy and New Zealand, a pattern was beginning to emerge whereby abbots would be moved on roughly every two years. The idea behind that was to try and avoid anyone becoming overly attached to one place. This wasn’t the only reason Ajahn Sumedho sent me to take over at Harnham in Northumberland, but it fitted in with the pattern. A second monk was to join me, Tan Vipassi. Before heading north, he and I spent the Winter Retreat together at Amaravati.

1 Forest Sangha calendar