# Dark Clouds Descending

Travelling further west, from Bali to Java, there was an undeniable culture change. The population was Indonesian; however, whereas Bali was predominantly Hindu, Java was distinctly Muslim. Java felt like a different country. Whilst staying in Surabaya, Ross decided he had enough of travelling and began the journey back to Mullumbimby. From now on I would be on my own. Ross was never really into meditation, which for me was more important than anything else. I liked seeing sights, sort of, but I suspect the call to the inner life was the stronger pull. By this stage of my journey it was dawning on me that I was not a traveller. However, since I was in Indonesia, and there was no pressure to be elsewhere, I decided I may as well look around.

For a brief while in Java I did toy with doing batik painting, but I don’t recall if the fantasy ever progressed beyond a conversation with someone in Yogyakarta. While staying in Yogyakarta I checked out the Dieng Plateau, from which it is possible to view both the Java Sea to the north and the Indian Ocean to the south. I visited Borobudur[1], an ancient, monumental Buddhist stupa originating from a period prior to the arrival of Islam. The site definitely didn’t feel like a spiritual sanctuary as it had tourists scampering all over it taking photos. Somewhere I had read that a beach, a few miles south of Yogyakarta on the coast of Java, was worth visiting. Perhaps I had been spoiled growing up in New Zealand because I found the beach rather uninspiring.

Gradually I was having to admit to myself that travelling around looking at stuff was boring. What was the point if inwardly you weren’t at ease. I clearly was not at ease. The calm and clarity I had known a few months earlier, now felt very remote. Not that I had lost faith in it, not at all, but I had lost sight of it.

I did find people interesting. To my surprise I had managed to pick up a functional grasp of Bahasa Indonesia[2] which meant I was able to enjoy some sense of connection with many of the folk I met. Most of them were warm and friendly and seemed to want to communicate. I say, ‘to my surprise’, because I was not very successful at learning French in my third and forth form years at Morrinsville College. This left me with the impression that I was without ability when it came to speaking any language other than English. It would seem that in those days New Zealand’s education system was still modelled on that of the British. Why else were we not learning Japanese or Chinese? I couldn’t see the point in learning French. In my Report Card for 1965 it is written, ‘Half-hearted in his approach, Keith could work harder.’

It similarly surprised me to realize that the people I found least appealing, and indeed sadder, were fellow travellers. I must have assumed we were part of some sort of global community and would all view each other warmly. This assumption showed up just how wet behind the ears this Kiwi really was. We were all obviously financially better off than many of the locals, yet that didn’t deter the Western travellers from becoming heated, and sometimes downright insulting, in how they haggled when making purchases. The interaction between customer and seller, I discovered, was in that culture a significant part of making any transaction. Nearly all the buying and selling I witnessed amongst the Indonesians was always amicable. At times it might have become animated but there was a civility to the engagement. Unfortunately, civility often went out the window when it was a certain kind of backpacker doing the dealing: how sad.

Perhaps the saddest thing I saw during that period was on a train trip from Yogyakarta to Jakarta. At first I couldn’t understand why a young French couple in our carriage were behaving so rudely; it wasn’t just disrespectful, it was revolting. They were rolling in the aisle of the carriage, moaning and thrashing about. I think it was only when another passenger told me they were going cold turkey[3] from a heroin addiction that I began to understand. They looked educated, affluent, probably experienced in the ways of the world, yet here they were without anyone to care for them. No welfare state to rescue them, no friends to support them: so tragic.

Being in Jakarta also triggered sadness in me. For the first time, in this sprawling metropolis, the disparity between rich and poor became painfully evident. I had no companions with whom to discuss the questions and concerns that were flooding my twenty-two-year old mind. Indignation and sorrow disturbed my already clouded heart. I was beginning to doubt what I was doing. Without friends, without a clear direction, and without the inner resource of centredness, I was flailing.

On the boat ride from Jakarta to Singapore, several of the group of travellers I was with helped each other cut their hair. We had heard that the authorities we should expect to meet at immigration wouldn’t even allow you into the country if the length of your hair breached their strict regulations. The only other thing I knew about Singapore was that it became part of Malaysia[4] on my birthday, 16th September; although that arrangement didn’t last long, with Singapore soon becoming independent. The other memory I now have of my stay there is of waking up one morning in the hotel to find everything was flooded. I had a room on the ground floor and it hadn’t occurred to me the night before that I should put my backpack up on a chair. There had been heavy rains overnight and the city’s wastewater management was shown to be seriously lacking. My old passport from that time indicates that I left Singapore on 8th September 1974.

Whether hitchhiking was actually an acceptable thing to be doing in Malaysia or not I don’t know; perhaps it was another example of a naive Kiwi assuming everywhere was similar to his own habitat. It did work though, and I received rides from the border to Kuala Lumpur and then, a day later, on to Penang. Penang was charming. My accommodation this time was a simple grass roof hut right on the beach. Lovely as the location was though my inner world was becoming darker. Meditation wasn’t giving me any ease, and the distractions that other travellers seemed drawn by were unappealing. The most radical thing I did there was to treat myself to a Guinness beer and a slice of cherry cheesecake by way of marking my twenty-third birthday.

The one proper book I was carrying with me during that journey was Basho’s The Narrow Road to the Deep North[5]. I loved reading Haiku. Three lines of text didn’t challenge me in the way a large body of text could. And something in the way Basho used words – something about how he writes about wandering and wondering and observing nature – was reassuring. Thank you, Basho. Words are so powerful. When we relate to life primarily from our heads, we readily forget that words are symbols that human beings have crafted over millennia to communicate a richness of meaning. More than 300 years after Basho died, the craftsmanship of the man is still admired and appreciated around the world.

When I was hitchhiking from Penang towards the Malay-Thai border I was again picked up by a couple of British expats. They were very friendly and even invited me to stay in their home. Later it became apparent that they needed a babysitter. I was happy to oblige, though thinking about it now, I confess it strikes me as daring on their part, almost to the point of dereliction, for them to abandon their child to someone they had just picked up hitchhiking. I was grateful though and apparently so were they. The next day they arranged for me to be driven to the border. I was dropped on the Malaysian side of the border and walked across into Thailand.

1 Borobudur

2 Bahasa Indonesia

3 Cold turkey treatment

4 Malaysia Day

5 The Narrow Road to the Deep North