# Better a Monk Than a Drunk

Bhikshu Ham Wol had arranged for the two of us to be staying at a Tibetan Centre in Mt Eden, a particularly lovely part of Auckland. Like much of New Zealand’s largest city, this suburb is nestled on the edge of a dormant volcano (there are roughly 50 dormant volcanoes[1] in Auckland alone, and many more volcanoes throughout the country, several still active).

This Tibetan Buddhist centre was of the Gelugpa tradition associated with Lama Yeshi and Lama Zopa. I had attended a session of talks by these two Lamas some years earlier in Bangkok, but I couldn’t say I knew much about their practices. It did seem though that they placed a lot of emphasis on study. Study seemed to take precedence over meditation.

Meeting and staying with this group in Mt Eden was enjoyable. They were exceedingly considerate. I doubt whether any of them had ever met a Theravadin monk before and would not have been familiar with our 227 rules. Bhikshu Ham Wol, who had arrived from Korea quite a few months earlier, had a distinctly different take on the monks’ rules. He had spent time in Thailand and had initially taken novice (samanera) precepts there, but had left and gone to Korea to take up the monks’ training. The most obvious difference between us, besides the fact that his robes were grey and mine were brown, was that he handled money. He was also comfortable cooking food; these two points meant that the laypeople found him much easier to look after. For my part, there was no way I was going to dilute my commitment to the discipline as it had been taught to me by my teachers. Although Bhikhsu Ham Wol and I had not met before, other than in written correspondence, we quickly settled into an easy mode of cooperation and mutual support. I felt our rules served as a protection and source of strength, while he seemed to perceive them as creating an unhelpful distance between us and the community of householders; but that difference never caused any issues between us. We were both excited to be in New Zealand, and obviously this was a time when interest in Buddhism was beginning to blossom. In the few months he had been there he had already connected with many groups, and he was keen that we travel around the country together and offer teachings to them.

One of those connections was with the FWBO, or the Friends of The Western Buddhist Order. As far as I could make out, this was an organisation attempting to establish itself as a secular community of people committed to the Buddhist teachings, contrasting itself with the monastic communities found in Asia. Its founder, Sangharakshita, was a contemporary of Ajahn Khantipalo; they had spent time together in India but ended up parting ways. This group in Auckland was very energetic and impressively well set up. Before I left to go north and spend time with family, I visited their library and they generously allowed me to borrow from their reference section the five volumes of the Vinaya Pitaka. While I was living at Wat Pah Nanachat I don’t think we had an English translation of the Vinaya Pitaka; in those days we took our guidance from the Thai commentaries ‒ Vinayamukha, Volumes one and two.

My arrival back in Opua must have been hard for my parents. I was painfully skinny to look at, which for a mother can be no easy thing. She knew there was no room for negotiation over my eating in the evening but I did agree to eat twice a day before noon. Thankfully, there was no big welcome home party organised; I would have found that difficult to handle. As far as I recall, I settled into a routine which included doing morning and evening chanting, periods of formal meditation and spending time talking with my mother. The role that external structures play in containing internal chaos was something of which I was already aware. My father and I had never had much of a relationship, but on this occasion he did seem keen to take me out for walks. Because he was so private, I never did find out from him what he really thought about the way I was living. One day, though, I dared to ask my mother directly if my father was embarrassed to be seen with me in robes, walking around the village. She was emphatic that the way I appeared, and for that matter what other people thought, was of no concern to him. Apparently he had said that he would rather have me as a monk than a drunk. That wasn’t exactly a fulsome expression of appreciation, but coming from my father it felt like a gesture of approval.

Regularly I would go out on my own for long walks in the beautiful surrounding countryside. I was intentionally trying to build up some physical strength. The food my mother prepared was nourishing, and there was no need to be concerned about offending Thai customs. In Thailand there is an accepted view that monks should not pay too much attention to their physical strength. That has positive and negative consequences. On the positive side it is obviously suitable that the emphasis be on letting go of vanity, however, on the negative side, it means that these days many monks suffer from obesity and diabetes. For those walks I would pack the five volumes of the Vinaya Pitaka into a bag and carry them on my back just as someone at the gym might lift weights. I like to think I also studied the texts, though now, nearly forty years later, I can’t say for sure.

Being alone as a monk in that situation after having spent several years contained within an intensely structured environment, triggered anxiety. My mother had spent much of her life burdened with anxiety and perhaps I had inherited some of those traits from her. Even without that, the situation was odd: I was twenty-nine years old, the only Theravada Buddhist monk in the country, and with an awareness of how the way I conducted myself could have consequences for monks who would visit New Zealand in the future. I was making more out of it than was needed, for sure, but maybe that was better than being in a hurry to feel overly relaxed.

1 Auckland volcanic field