# Time in Thailand Coming to an End

The difference in training style didn’t cause me to think, even for a minute, that I would be better off living at Wat Bahn Tard. Tan Ajahn Chah’s employment of group practice as a training tool made very good sense to me. Years later I adopted a similar attitude in how I ran the monastery in Northumberland. In the first few years of monastic training, most of us want to be able to do what we want, when we want – something like, ‘doing your own thing, in your own time.’ However, if doing our own thing had been so great, we wouldn’t have gone to live in a mosquito-infested forest with one meal a day and excessively sweet drinks in the evening. We went because we understood, at least to some degree, that a commitment to ‘my way’ doesn’t work. Hence, training involves countering ‘my way’. And living together with other monks, often with very different preferences, is an excellent way to get in touch with ‘my way’. Getting in touch with ‘my way’ is the first step; then we have to learn to let go of ‘my way’.

I was pleased to be back again at Wat Pah Nanachat with what felt like family. During my absence, the BBC had visited Wat Pah Pong and produced a film for the Open University, called The Mindful Way. Not long after that film was shown in Britain, an elderly English woman who saw it was so inspired that she quickly caught a flight to Thailand and found her way up to Tan Ajahn Chah’s monastery. On the day she was due to depart for Britain, I happened to be at Wat Pah Pong waiting under Tan Ajahn Chah’s kuti, ready to join him on morning alms-round. An American maechee who was living there at the time, brought this English guest to pay her respects to the teacher and, at the same time, asked if he would kindly say something like ‘goodbye’ into her tape recorder. Tan Ajahn Chah took the recorder in his hand and delivered a profound and loving message lasting about fifteen minutes.

Since the maechee was only able to speak Laotian, and not Thai, I volunteered (or was asked) to translate this short talk into English. After returning from alms-round I rushed over to my kuti to translate it in time to give it to the departing guest. That talk is now printed in ‘The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah[1]’, page 233, with the title, Living with The Cobra. It is a brilliant, succinct summary of the right way to approach practice. My favourite part of the talk is where Tan Ajahn says,

We extinguish fire at the place at which it appears. Wherever it is hot, that’s where we can make it cool. And so it is with enlightenment. Nibbana is found in saṃsara. Enlightenment and delusion exist in the same place, just as do hot and cold. It’s hot where it was cold and cold where it was hot. When heat arises, the coolness disappears, and when there is coolness, there’s no more heat. In this way Nibbana and saṃsara are the same.

I have listened to this talk many times over the years and continue to enjoy the vitality and the compassion in Tan Ajahn Chah’s voice. When I reflect on it these days, what I hear Tan Ajahn Chah saying accords with how I have come to think about the two different ways of approaching practice: one way could be called a ‘goal-oriented approach’ and the other a ‘source-oriented approach’. People are different and naturally have different ways of picking up the practice. Some, it seems, benefit from having a clear idea of the goal spelt out for them, and the stages of reaching that goal. They feel energised by the perception that they’re making progress along the path. For others, ideas of a goal can serve a useful purpose in the beginning, but the deeper they go in practice the more such ideas get in the way. For them what is more important is learning to let go of approximations of a goal, letting go of even wanting to progress, and instead growing in ability to be more intensely and accurately present in this moment with whatever is happening - resolutely releasing out of habits of being someone trying to get somewhere.

It was around this time of that year that Tan Tiradhammo began compiling the first collection of translated talks given by Tan Ajahn Chah which were eventually printed in a small booklet called Bodhinyana. A fledgling sangha was beginning to settle in, in Britain, but there was no idea that in only a very few years a worldwide community of monasteries[2] would be established. Here at Wat Pah Nanachat we were still sweeping leaves and pulling water from the well every day, and dealing with the almost constant challenges that such a simple and disciplined life is guaranteed to produce.

On occasions I would still become caught up in worry about my health, especially to do with the consumption of sugar. Eating only once a day around 8 o’clock in the morning, and sweating a lot because of the heat, meant that the temptation to gobble vast amounts of sugar in the evening was strong. I felt sure it was not a sensible thing to be doing, but I guess I was addicted. At some stage that year I underwent a medical test to assess my sugar metabolism, and the result indicated that I either had a tumour on my pancreas or was suffering from ‘functional’ hypoglycaemia. After further tests it was agreed that there were no signs of my having a tumour, so the doctors prescribed a regime for dealing with hypoglycaemia. They recommended I eat several small meals throughout the day, including in the evening, and see if the sugar metabolism would stabilize.

This event coincided with a fad passing through the monastery inspired by a book called Water Of Life: A Treatise on Urine Therapy, by John W. Armstrong. Eating several small meals a day, and especially, eating in the evening, were not options, so I determined to abstain from consuming any sugar at all for the duration of the three months Rains Retreat of that year; also I committed to drinking urine and often received a massage of fermented urine. I have only a very vague memory now of undergoing another test at the end of the three months but what I recall is that my sugar metabolism was by then perfectly normal. Not only is the drinking of urine mentioned as an allowable medicine in Buddhist scripture, but it turns out that it is a well-known practice, especially amongst yogis in India. The book mentioned that the practice was not suitable for anyone with high blood pressure, and also I imagine it says it shouldn’t be used by anyone who is taking other medication.

After that Rains Retreat I asked Ajahn Jagaro if I could go back and spend some time in New Zealand. My parents had offered me a flight ticket and in correspondence with them I had said I would like to accept their offer, but only on the condition that I could return to Thailand. I don’t imagine Ajahn Jagaro had any objections, because I went over to see Tan Ajahn Chah who, at that time, was staying in a nearby village monastery, Wat Gor Nork. It was a pleasure to be in his company, and I don’t recall him raising any concerns about my going for a visit home.

This reminds me of another occasion regarding Wat Gor Nork when Ajahn Jagaro himself went over to speak with Tan Ajahn Chah. He was accompanied by Tan Thitiñano, a French-Italian monk, and Tan Gavesako, a Japanese monk. I wasn’t around on that occasion but I have a tape recording of the conversation. The three young monks were questioning Tan Ajahn Chah about what exactly is meant by the term ‘Original Mind’ and what exactly is contemplation. A translation of this conversation is printed on p.475 in The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah[3]. Here is my favourite extract from that dialogue,

Q: I still don’t understand. Is true contemplating the same as thinking?

Tan Ajahn Chah: We use thinking as a tool, but the knowing that arises because of its use is above and beyond the process of thinking; it leads to our not being fooled by our thinking anymore. You recognize that all thinking is merely the movement of the mind, and also that knowing is not born and doesn’t die. What do you think all this movement called ‘mind’ comes out of? What we talk about as the mind – all the activity – is just the conventional mind. It’s not the real mind at all. What is real just IS, it’s not arising and it’s not passing away.

This teaching inspired me to develop the meditation practice I have used for many years, of enquiring, in WHAT is all this taking place?

I departed Thailand for New Zealand on 25th November 1979, with a ten day stopover in Sydney. On landing in Sydney airport and exiting the plane, the cooler air seemed to trigger a sensation which gave me a feeling like my brain had started working again. It was as if I had been partly brain dead.

This was my second visit to Wat Buddharangsee where Luang Por Mahasamai was still living. He was still smiling. During those few days there I was encouraged to give a talk at one of the local Buddhist societies, which didn’t exactly fill me with delight. As I recall, however, I might have been forewarned, either by Ajahn Jagaro, or another New Zealand monk who had been training in Korea and was also currently home visiting, Bhikshu Ham Wol. Bhikshu Ham Wol and I had been in correspondence, and he was arranging accommodation for me in Auckland before I ventured north to the Bay of Islands to see my parents. Whoever it was who warned me about possibly giving a talk in Sydney, also helpfully advised me to approach it as giving voice to my own inner contemplations: instead of just inwardly pondering on a theme, give your ponderings a voice and that will be your talk.

On 5th December I took a flight to New Zealand and landed in Auckland.

1 The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah

2 Forest Sangha

3 The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah