# Our Spiritual Toolkit

Arriving back at Chithurst I felt renewed and revitalised. From now on, my practice was more about working with a quality of feeling awareness, in touch with the body, a much broader perspective than viewing life from my head. (Of course I hadn’t previously been aware of the degree to which I was identified with my thinking mind). It no longer mattered quite so much what the sensations were – gladness, sadness, joy or sorrow – the task was how to receive them, how to allow them. Gradually my ideas about what awakening meant were changing; now I was more interested in ‘unobstructed receptivity of everything’, or ‘unobstructed relationship with everything’. The idea of striving towards some imagined experience in the future really made little sense to me. This didn’t mean I abandoned all notions of a goal; it meant my relationship with those notions was changing.

It felt as if up until that point in time I had been listening to music with the bass turned down. Now the bass was turned way up! Aliveness. Instead of trying to be free from painful feelings such as anticipation, for instance, I was now interested in how to feel whatever feeling I was feeling, without adding or taking anything away from it: learning what it meant to be free to feel that which I was feeling, rather than struggling to be free from certain feelings. The feeling of anticipation, for example, is just a feeling; but there is a space in which that feeling is arising and ceasing. The feeling is not ultimate; there is also awareness of the feeling. Now I felt like I had a powerful new tool in my spiritual toolkit: embodied awareness.

This new tool didn’t suddenly absolve me of the pain of guilt and self-doubt, however. There were still periods when I struggled with a sense that I was about to be overwhelmed by pain. Sometimes I would have to tell myself, ‘Just because I feel bad, does not mean I am bad’. The bullies of guilt and self-doubt, along with many other apparent obstructions, didn’t disappear, but there now seemed to be a chance that we could get to know each other.

As a craftsperson will have a variety of tools in their toolkit, so those committed to awakening require a variety of techniques and skills to deal with the many challenges he or she is going to encounter on their quest. Since everyone is different in temperament and talent, we need to equip ourselves according to our own conditioning. In my case, it became very apparent that I had been seriously out of touch with my body, so I needed skills that addressed that particular imbalance. The breathing discipline I learnt that year in New Zealand helped.

So, too, did frequent visits to see a Vietnamese acupuncturist in London, called Thong. That he was a Buddhist monk within the Mahayana tradition and a Tai Chi teacher were also significant. For a period during the Vietnam war he had been imprisoned, as a monk. After having been released from prison he disrobed, and, before leaving Vietnam to come to Britain, married and had a family. Once his family had grown up, he again requested the monks’ Precepts. By that time Thong already had an acupuncture clinic established in London and was well-known as a skilled Tai Chi teacher. After many years, I continue to practise the Qigong form that he taught me. And I believe I continue to benefit from the many sessions of acupuncture and the traditional Chinese herbal remedies that he kindly offered me.

Whatever understanding of the Buddha’s teachings we might have, if our body is not in harmony, then life will be a struggle. Maybe some of those struggles are kammic and unavoidable, but perhaps some of them are not necessary.

In Theravada Buddhism it is taught that there are three types of illness: one from which you will recover whether or not you take any remedy; another from which you will recover if you take an appropriate remedy, and from which you won’t recover if you don’t take the remedy; and the third, where whether you take any remedy or not makes no difference, since the illness is a result of kamma. (For a more literally accurate interpretation of what the Buddha said, see Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation of the Anguttara Nikaya – ‘The Numerical Discourses’, Somerville, Wisdom Publications, MA, USA, 2012, Book of Threes, ‘Patients’, page 217). Thank you, Thong, for those treatments, and remedies; for teaching me the Qigong form; also for your strength and gentleness.

Somewhere I heard or read that, within certain schools of the Tibetan Buddhist tradition, they won’t even introduce you to meditation practice until you have completed one hundred thousand prostrations. It makes sense to me now why, in Zen Buddhism, so much attention is paid to the sitting posture during meditation; if you begin to droop it could result in your receiving a wack. When Tan Ajahn Chah returned from a visit to America, he spoke enthusiastically about stories he had heard of the Chinese Patriarch monk Venerable Bodhidharma. Tan Ajahn Chah was impressed by how, if Ven. Bodhidharma asked you a question and you answered it wrongly, you received a whack; if you answered it correctly, you received a whack; if you didn’t answer it at all, you received a whack. ‘As for us Theravadins’, Tan Ajahn Chah said, ‘we just carry on talking about Dhamma, saying it is like this and it’s like that, and so on.’ Tan Ajahn Chah also wanted us to get out of the head and come back into the body.

At one point, I think it was in 1989, Ajahn Sumedho received word that Tan Ajahn Chah appeared to be dying, and so he quickly departed for Thailand. As it turned out, it wasn’t until January 1992 that Tan Ajahn Chah eventually passed away. Just before leaving us on that occasion, however, Ajahn Sumedho had turned to me and, almost as a passing comment, said that he wanted me to be his substitute at a one-day seminar due to take place at the Buddhist Society in Eccleston Square, London. The theme for the day was, ‘Several Schools, One Way’. By then I should have been used to how Ajahn Sumedho would occasionally throw a googly, not just to me, but to anyone in the community. I have never figured out whether he did that sort of thing as a strategy to test our agility, or if perhaps he wasn’t even aware that he was doing it. Personally, I wouldn’t have expected a relatively inexperienced monk like me to be standing in for someone of Ajahn Sumedho’s stature on such a public platform – at least not without some sort of a discussion. An august line-up of very senior teachers had been planned, including Ven. Myokyo-Ni representing the Zen tradition, a famous Rimpoche for the Tibetans, and a well known elder from the Pure Land School. This was an invitation that did intimidate me.

On the day of the seminar, I discovered that Ven. Myokyo-Ni was to speak first and then I was to follow. Ven. Myokyo-Ni gave an inspiring talk, as always, but all I can recall now was that it was on the Four Noble Truths. From other conversations I have had with her, I know she never wanted to be described as a Zen practitioner – rather she insisted that she was a Zen Buddhist practitioner. Before being inspired by Christmas Humphreys and then following Japanese Zen Buddhism, she was already studying Theravada Buddhist teachings, and always maintained that having a good grounding in the original teachings was essential. That was all well and good, of course, but on the occasion of that Several Schools, One Way seminar, what was there left for me to talk about. One of the things I can still remember about my contribution on the day, was that when they pinned a microphone onto my robe at chest level, I imagined it was going to amplify the sound of my heart pounding.

During an interval between the talks, Ven. Myokyo-Ni and I went outside for a walk by the Square. I took the opportunity to ask for her thoughts on the situation in which we found ourselves: practising traditional forms of Buddhism in the West, in an environment that was not always welcoming or supportive. She turned and focused her gaze on me and said, ‘Venerable, when you are doing the real practice, it can feel like too much, too soon!’ Thank you again, Ven. Myokyo-Ni.

On another occasion when Ajahn Sumedho asked me to accompany him to the Buddhist Society, (not just to deputize for him), his talk had to be interrupted because there was a distracting amount of smoke rising up from behind where he was seated. As usual, he was sitting on a zafu in front of the shrine in the main meeting room of the Society. There was no mistaking it being smoke, and it wasn’t a small amount which could have come from the sticks of incense. What had happened, it seemed, was that when he had lit the candles and incense as a preliminary to the occasion, a spark must have dropped onto his zafu, igniting it. Somebody helpfully removed the smoking zafu and the talk continued. Interestingly, quite a long time afterwards, when we went to leave the Society buildings, we found a bright glowing orb sitting on the pavement outside the front door. That helped me appreciate why kapok filled zafus, although preferable to sitting on a polyester-filled one, are considered a fire hazard; once they start burning it is difficult to put them out.