# Ordeal in the Attic

In part because of the confidence that had arisen from being more in touch with my body, and because of the sense of hope that the breathing exercise had given me, when we were preparing for the 1990 Winter Retreat at Chithurst, I asked Ajahn Anando if I could determine to spend the two months in solitude. I was interested to see what the increased intensity would bring up. There were other motivations as well, but having a chance to meet myself in solitude was appealing. It turned out that I overreached with that determination.

The room I was living in was in the attic, and the floor space was roughly three by four metres (there were also two sizable raised platforms). I covered the windows with tracing paper so light could come in but I couldn’t see out. The idea behind that was to intentionally frustrate any impulses to distract myself from what was going on inside of me. Somebody left food outside my door each day, and during the community’s morning chanting period, I would take my slop bucket down and empty it in the bathroom. Other than that, the only time I left the room in those two months was to participate in the fortnightly recitation of the Rule.

Very soon after the retreat began, I was assailed by intense anxiety. Much of the following two months was spent doing whatever it took to survive the onslaught of fear and dread. I find it impossible to compare the horror I endured during those two months with what had occurred at Wat Hin Maak Peng in my first Rains Retreat, since somehow I was not the same person. I had accumulated many experiences over the approximately sixteen years since then, and acquired new skills. None of those skills, however, protected me from having to go through what turned out to be another agonizing ordeal.

At one point during the retreat a severe storm struck and, as a result of my confusion, I was consumed by feelings of fear that I personally had caused the storm. On this occasion I broke my silence to enquire whether anyone had been killed in the storm. To say I was consumed, is partly an exaggeration, since if I had truly been consumed I would not have survived. I did survive, but the intensity was way more than I bargained for.

After the Winter Retreat ended and I again joined the community for evening puja, Ajahn Anando invited me to give a talk. My memory of that occasion now is that the act of opening my mouth to speak required such a huge amount of effort – so much intensity had built up over the two months – that I spoke only one sentence.

It took some time before I could find a sense of balance again. My confidence hadn’t been shattered – not at all – but it now had a companion called modesty. All those hours spent bathing in exquisite bodily sensations associated with the breathing exercises, hadn’t driven me crazy, but they had led to a degree of delusion. I think the bass had been turned up a bit too far.