# The End of the River

Approximately eighty-five miles south of Auckland, in New Zealand’s North Island, there is a small town called Te Awamutu. This is where I was born in September 1951 and was given the name Keith Morgan. The Maori name of the town, Te Awamutu, translates into English as the end of the river. In various online resources[1] it is explained that it wasn’t that the river Manga-o-hoi actually ended there, it was just that beyond that point it became unnavigable by canoe. I’m guessing that in 1951 the town had a population of about 5000. The area had a history as a place where battles had been fought between opposing Maori tribes, where an early group of Christian missionaries had established itself, and as a settlement used by the British military during the Waikato wars. By the time my parents, Pearl and Ian Morgan, moved there, Te Awamutu had found its identity as a service centre for the surrounding farming communities.

Christianity was a defining element in our family. My father was the youngest of six children in a family headed by a Presbyterian minister, Rev. Richard Morgan and his wife Grace Morgan. My mother was the only child of a Baptist minister, Rev. Alfred Dewe and his second wife, Sadie Dewe, or ‘Nana’ as we knew her. Rev. A. Dewe died young and so eventually Nana remarried another Baptist minister, Rev. Christopher Wilfrid Duncumb, after spending a number of years as housekeeper to a Presbyterian minister, Rev. Lloyd Wilkinson. Auntie Nessie, my father’s older sister, was a deaconess in the Presbyterian Church, Uncle Roy was a Baptist minister and my younger sister, Jennifer, went on to become a pastor, who, along with her pastor husband Guthrie Boyd, ministered within the church of the Assembly of God. Recently I found out that my younger brother Bryan, is ministering these days as a lay preacher in the Paihia Christian Fellowship.

We lived in Te Awamutu for about two years before moving to a similar sized town, Morrinsville, about twenty miles away. I imagine my father’s work was the reason for the move. Although for much of my life I have struggled to find my place in this family, this does not mean I don’t value it. To be born to parents who worked so tirelessly to raise their four children in a wholesome environment was indeed a blessing. At later stages in my life it became apparent that growing up in that environment was a mixed blessing and it did take some skill and discernment to decipher which aspects were truly valuable and which needed to be left behind.

When I think back now about my father, I have huge admiration and gratitude for his integrity and kindness. Besides his Monday to Friday job working in Hawkes Motors Ford garage, initially as a mechanic and eventually as the manager, he would spend many hours after work and on the weekends cultivating a substantial vegetable garden that he had planted out the back of our house. Always on Sunday he would drive the family to the morning church service and for some time led the Sunday School of which he was superintendent. Regularly after Sunday lunch, he would drive out to remote village halls – places like Tahuna, Ngatea, Patetonga – to conduct a church service for the farming families who couldn’t manage to get into town.

Similar feelings of appreciation arise when I remember my mother’s dedication and how she would spend days on end in the kitchen throughout the hot summers, bottling and preserving vegetables, apples, and peaches and pears to keep the family well fed through the year. She also sewed many of our clothes.

Bible readings and prayers at the evening dinner table were normal. The summer camp I was sent to was a Christian Youth Camp (CYC) at Ngaruawahia. Since my parents were teetotal, and drinking at the pub was a national pastime in New Zealand, we had very few visitors. The only visitors I remember coming to our house were relatives who were equally if not more devout Christians, and other families who attended our church. Devotion to religion from such an early age served to instil virtues in me which I continue to value. I can’t recall my parents ever arguing and, with only one very minor exception, nor did I ever hear either of them speaking critically of anyone.

Music was another central aspect of our family life. Both my mother and father were vocal leaders during hymn singing in church on Sunday; not just singing loudly, but with fervour and enjoying the opportunity to break out into harmony. My mother sometimes played the organ in church. At home, our idea of a good time amounted to us children standing around singing praise to Jesus while Nana played the piano. Auntie Nessie spent many years working as a missionary to various Maori communities, and leading a choir of Maori singers.

David, my older brother by two years, learned to play the cello. I played the violin for a while, and I seem to remember that Jennifer, my younger sister, played the piano. Compared with what most families these days might think of as having a good time, our hymn singing sessions probably sound rather tame, however I recall them as a source of considerable happiness: the togetherness, the sheer pleasure of making beautiful music and the delight in praising the Divine. When I was old enough to have my own bicycle I would regularly ride out into the countryside to be alone. I frequented the woodlands along the banks of the nearby Piako River where I would passionately sing my heart out. Something about unrestrained adoration of the Almighty triggered tremendous joy within me: it was thrilling, even electric and exhilarating.

1 Early History of Te Awamutu