# Lessons to Learn

Once a week the abbot of Wat Boworn, Phra Somdet, would lead a class in English in an air-conditioned room adjacent to his residence. These meetings were open to members of the sangha and laity alike. They were lessons in the pariyatti, or theoretical aspects of Dhamma, and were well attended. Sitting and walking meditation are obviously important aspects of this path, but if we don’t have a good grounding in pariyatti, our meditation can be heading off in an altogether unhelpful direction. Personally I haven’t read many Dhamma books in my life - ‘What the Buddha Taught’ by Walpola Rahula, ‘The Word Of The Buddha’ by Nyanatiloka, and The Dhammapada[1], being three of the most significant – but that doesn’t mean I don’t respect the pariyatti aspect of training. People are different: some people need a lot of theoretical explanation before their faith is strong and clear enough, others need less. Besides, some people learn better by listening than reading. It is only relatively recently in human history that the majority of humans have been able to read and write. I am one of those who enjoys learning from listening.

At one of those Wednesday evening classes, the Venerable Master Hsuan Hua, abbot of The City Of Ten Thousand Buddhas in California, was present. He had with him several of his Western disciples, including, Heng Sure and Heng Ch’au. Heng Sure and Heng Ch’au had completed their Three Steps, One Bow[2] pilgrimage up the coast of California and their group had been visiting Malaysia. I recall the Master having an interesting response to the many questions that were asked of him: he just wouldn’t answer. This went on for quite a long while with people asking for his thoughts on such subjects as arhats and bodhisattvas, anapanasati, vipassana, the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, and so on. Then the bell rang for evening chanting and that was the sign the meeting would conclude. At that point the Master started talking. What he said, and what stayed with me, was that as a teacher his job was to trick us. It is because of all the games that we play in our minds that we stay lost. His job was to trick us out of believing in our games. Thank you, Master Hsuan Hua.

One of the regular attendees at these Wednesday meetings was Mrs Josie Stanton, the wife of the ex-US Ambassador to Thailand. She had been living in Bangkok for many years and held up Phra Somdet as her Dhamma teacher. She was also a very generous supporter of quite a number of the Western monks and novices at Wat Boworn. The house where she lived when she was in Thailand was in the lush gardens of Her Majesty The Queen’s mother’s residence and was within walking distance of Wat Boworn. She took her study and practice of Dhamma very seriously and I believed she genuinely appreciated her conversations with her teacher Phra Somdet. On one occasion, after she had been travelling around Thailand and was upset about the decrepit state of many of the monasteries that she had seen, she asked Phra Somdet how it could be that this wonderful and precious Dhamma teaching could end up looking so unseemly. Phra Somdet’s calm reply was that she shouldn’t be too disturbed by the deterioration of buildings and institutions as they too are subject to the law of impermanence, anicca: the Dhamma is not anicca, just the structures.

As weeks went by, the question of where I was going to stay and whether I would request upasampada (acceptance into the sangha of monks) became more relevant. In July the annual Rainy Season Retreat (vassa) would begin and at that point I would be obliged to stay put for three months. I’m not sure which came first: the decision to request upasampada at Wat Boworn or my meeting some very friendly monks from Wat Hin Maak Peng. Wat Hin Maak Peng was Ajahn Thate’s monastery near Nong Khai in North East Thailand. Tan Ajahn Thate was the meditation master under whom Phra Somdet Nyanasamvara had trained once he had completed his studies. Another Western monk, Tan Dhammachando, and I took the decision to travel up-country to Wat Hin Maak Peng for the vassa. If I recall it correctly, my upasampada took place at Wat Boworn around the time of the full moon of May 1975, which was Vesakha Puja, the occasion marking the birth, enlightenment and passing away of the Buddha. Phra Somdet Nyanasamvara was my preceptor, and Mrs Josie Stanton sponsored and presented my robes. Great gratitude to Phra Somdet, and a sincere thank you to Josie Stanton.

Wearing the robes of a fully accepted Buddhist monk (bhikkhu) brought with it an intensification and many more new lessons. It was clear that there were stronger expectations to conform to higher standards of conduct as well as requirements to participate in various ceremonies. Now, instead of the modest ten precepts that defined the conduct of a novice (samanera) there were 227 that had to be followed.

Early on after taking up the monk’s training, I received a painful wake-up call regarding the consequences of heedless speech.

One evening, after the group meditation in Phra Somdet’s residence, I made a joke to one of the other participants about how I had been just about to drop into jhana when a mosquito bit me and ruined things. A short while later, on my way back to my room, I was reflecting on what I had just said, and was suddenly struck by a truly terrible upthrust of guilt and anxiety at the thought that I had just made a false claim to a superhuman state – an offence of automatic disrobing. I was so shocked and confused I straight away made my way over to see Phra Somdet. That he was engaged at the time in a meeting with other senior sangha members didn’t prevent me from approaching him and explaining how I thought I might have just broken one of the four most serious monks’ rules. He kindly gave me his attention and was quick to reassure me that, since I had obviously been making a joke, there was nothing serious to be concerned about.

As it happened, I should have been concerned not because I had committed a disrobing offence, but that obsessive guilt, a fault line in my psyche, had been revealed; such a susceptibility wasn’t going to disappear just because of a few words from a kindly abbot.

1 A Dhammapada for Contemplation

2 Three Steps, One Bow