# The Spirit of Spiritual Community

From June 1976 until November 1979 I considered Wat Pah Nanachat to be home. I know Buddhist monks are described as ‘having gone forth from home to homelessness’; however, that is an ideal. If we cling too much to that ideal we could forget to cultivate the wholesome source of support which comes with having kalyanamitta. The culture of Wat Pah Nanachat was imbued with the spirit of spiritual companionship. Ajahn Sumedho was like a magnet around which iron filings would configure, or a flowering shrub which attracted lots of bees. His evident enthusiasm inspired and sustained the many spiritual aspirants who passed through Wat Pah Nanachat. Some only briefly stopped by, some stayed for a short while, and others settled in and made a commitment.

Tan Ajahn Chah would pop in from time to time and offer us some of his wonderful variety of inspiration. We were like a young family and he was like a Grandfather who, instead of bringing us presents, would bring wisdom. In a typical talk that he gave one evening he spoke about how natural it was that not everyone who showed signs of having faith in Dhamma will follow it through. In that talk which was translated and is now called ‘Dhamma Nature’ (printed in ‘The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah[1]’, page 480) he says,

… Sometimes when a fruit tree is in bloom, a breeze stirs and scatters blossoms to the ground. Some buds remain and grow into a small green fruit. A wind blows and some of them, too, fall! Still others may become fruit or nearly ripe, or some even fully ripe, before they fall… When reflecting upon people, consider the nature of fruit in the wind: both are very uncertain. This uncertain nature of things can also be seen in the monastic life. Some people come to the monastery intending to ordain but change their minds and leave, some with heads already shaved. Others are already novices, then they decide to leave. Some ordain for only one Rains Retreat then disrobe. Just like fruit in the wind – all very uncertain! Our minds are also similar. A mental impression arises, draws and pulls at the mind, then the mind falls – just like fruit…

On another occasion he visited at a time when I was having trouble with a very nasty infection on my ankle which was taking a long time to heal. It was so bad in fact that I wasn’t going out in the morning on alms-round, something almost unheard of; if you wanted to eat you had to go out on alms-round. On this occasion, when Tan Ajahn Chah asked Ajahn Sumedho how everyone was doing, he mentioned that Tan Uppanno was struggling with a bad infection. Tan Ajahn Chah asked me to come forward and show him my foot. Whether or not he said anything at the time isn’t the point, it was his caring that I recall. I mention this incident here because of the impression his kindness left on me. It wasn’t just his wisdom that he shared with us, it was also his overall quality of attention; call it compassion, empathy, clarity – but whatever we might call it, it was a blessing.

The many blessings that emanated from Tan Ajahn Chah were at times obvious and welcome and at other times less obvious and they might even be less welcome. He was aware of this and made no apology for it. His intention was to offer whatever was needed for us to get the message and learn to let go of clinging. Once, when he was being questioned as to which system of meditation he taught: was it samatha, or vipassana, or anapanasati? – he replied that his system was ‘frustration’ (lit. Thai: toramarn). He knew he appeared inconsistent but that didn’t matter so long as his disciples got the message. This sounds similar to what Master Hsuan Hua of the City Of Ten Thousand Buddhas had said about his job being to trick us.

Not everyone did get the message. There was one guest staying who had had a very difficult time before coming to Wat Pah Nanachat and Tan Ajahn Chah spoke about the obstructions we create in our minds so long as we are still following our habits of clinging. In the case of this person, apparently they had become stuck with something that arose when they were in a subtle state of mind and hadn’t managed to let go of it. Tan Ajahn Chah explained that when we cling while in meditation, the consequences can be very difficult to correct. If, for example, we become afraid when we are in a somewhat subtle state of mind, and we attach to that fear, then when we come out of meditation, we remain stuck and the consequences affect other aspects of our life. Part of me was not pleased to hear about that; it felt too close to the bone. However, I understood he had only said it could be difficult to correct, not impossible. My commitment to the training was strong.

One of the guests who arrived and stayed for a longer period of time was a French Jesuit priest known as Por (Father) Pauset. He came to stay at Wat Pah Nanachat several times over the years and was responsible for the planting of a great many trees. He and Tan Ajahn Chah knew each other quite well and were able to comfortably converse in the local Isaan dialect. When Por Pauset had first arrived in North East Thailand, many years earlier, he could only speak French. He learned to speak Thai in the local dialect but then caught the mumps and went deaf. Although he did learn English that was only after he had already gone deaf, so his grasp was minimal. When he spoke with us, it was mostly in Thai or French, mixed with lots of hand gestures. He was a beautifully humble human being, intensely committed to cultivating the spiritual life. If he wasn’t living at Wat Pah Nanachat, wearing white and fitting in with the other postulants (pah kaaw), he resided at a village not too far away that was predominantly Christian.

Tan Ajahn Chah seemed unphased by paradox. He often spoke about the doubts that he had had to learn to handle in his own practice. Once when Tan Varapañño was helping me explain to him the struggle I was having coming to terms with my mad mind, he spoke about how at an earlier stage in his practice he had such intense fear of uncertainty that he ‘thought his head was going to explode’. He went on to say that, ‘If something is uncertain, and you demand that it be certain, you will suffer’. Again, in my mind, I can visualise his smile and still feel in my heart the warmth of wholesome human companionship. There was no judgement. Being in his company was so special and so normal.

Even his getting things wrong was inspiring, at least to me. After one of his visits to Wat Pah Nanachat he complimented the Phra farang (Western monks) for putting ugly old dead flowers on the central shrine in the sala, the implication being that he thought we were using this as a form of contemplation on impermanence and decay. In fact, the ‘old dead flowers’ was a dried flower arrangement that an artist woman from Bangkok had offered when she had been staying with us. We didn’t see them as ugly or as an object of contemplation on death and decay. Probably some people would prefer to think of Tan Ajahn Chah as perfect in all regards because it makes them feel secure to think that way, but personally I am happy to see he made such mistakes. We are not talking here about moral or ethical misjudgements, just errors on the level of culture and conventions. I never had a chance to discuss such matters with him, however I feel confident that he would not want us to project that fantasy of perfection onto him.

If Tan Ajahn Chah wasn’t visiting us at Wat Pah Nanachat, Ajahn Sumedho was going over to visit him at Wat Pah Pong. The two monasteries were within walking distance. On one of those occasions when Ajahn Sumedho was over at Wat Pah Pong, he mentioned to Tan Ajahn Chah how happy he was with the harmony and cooperation of everyone at Wat Pah Nanachat. Tan Ajahn Chah responded saying something like, ‘Well you won’t develop in conditions like that.’ He was highlighting a principle: to be free from suffering we must investigate suffering, and not just set ourselves up with agreeable conditions. Of course Tan Ajahn Chah supported harmonious cooperative community, but he would caution us against getting attached to the good feelings that arise in such circumstances; it is insight into suffering that leads to liberation, not being surrounded by nice conditions.

Ajahn Sumedho was a thoroughly faithful disciple of Tan Ajahn Chah, both in terms of his attitude towards monastic training and his approach to developing the inner life. His attitude seemed to be one of adhering to the tradition, while making an effort to avoid clinging. If something outside of the tradition felt congruent with the Dhamma-vinaya that Tan Ajahn Chah was teaching, then he was comfortable endorsing it. At one stage, in conversation with Ajahn Sumedho, he recommended I look into the teachings of the Chinese Ch’an Master Hsu Yun[2]. He suggested I might look at some translations by Charles Luk that we happened to have in our library, by Charles Luk. I did, and it was uplifting to discover that these teachings, although from another tradition, were so in tune with what was being taught by Tan Ajahn Chah. Also it was a joy to find how Master Hsu Yun encouraged using the upaya, or skilful means in practice, of enquiring into ‘who’. The validity of the experience I had of dropping into a deeper level of awareness on my first meditation retreat when I had asked, ‘who is aware?’, or ‘who is knowing?’, was in some helpful way affirmed by those translations. Presumably, as usual, I only read a small portion of the books I had been recommended, though some years later I did manage to read all of a biography of Master Hsu Yun, called Empty Cloud[3]. I am very glad I read that book. An image of Master Hsu Yun these days hangs beside those of Ajahn Thate and Tan Ajahn Chah in my kuti.

There were times during my stay at Wat Pah Nanachat when I longed to be able to openly talk over what had happened for me at Wat Hin Maak Peng. The wound was far from healed, and occasionally I did attempt to address the topic. But every time I started to get close to it, echoes of the terror would resurface, threatening me with a sense that I was again about to be overwhelmed. If anyone might get it, I thought, it could be Tan Jotiko, so on one occasion I did try to see if he could recognize what I was talking about. I am sure he listened, but I failed to communicate in a way that made any difference.

Of course I wanted to be understood, and probably some of the others were wondering about this Tan Uppanno character who seemed to be carrying such a burden around with him, but everyone had their stuff to be dealing with. What mattered was that we were companions on this demanding but meaningful journey together. That was already amazing.

I did still have to work hard at suspending assumptions such as, ‘I feel bad because I am bad’. However, the work served to build the strength of patience, of mindfulness, and of trust. Fortunately, I found I was willing and able to simply give myself into the training: to be on time for morning chanting, walk on alms-round, eat, sweep leaves, pull water from the well, be on time for evening chanting, and keep trusting. Without that ordeal I would have been less well-equipped when it came to handling the many challenges that lay ahead.

1 The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah

2 Master Hsu Yun

3 Biography of Master Hsu Yun, Empty Cloud