# Journeying

There is so much to thank Ram Dass for that I hardly know where to start. The inspiration I received from that book was likely one of the forces that motivated my leaving the Gordonton commune.

A few weeks before leaving, at an annual festival of devotion to Dionysus – aka Auckland University Arts Festival – I had met an Arts student from Wellington, John Vincent. We must have exchanged addresses because a few weeks later when I was in Wellington I looked him up. This was shortly before my twenty-first birthday. John was living in a typical (for Wellington) wooden house in Tasman Street, just across the road from Wellington Polytechnic College where he was doing a course in graphic design. Nearly all old buildings in Wellington are made of wood because the city is located on a fault line and regularly receives earthquakes. (New Zealand has approx. 20,000 quakes[1] each year.) There were five or six friends sharing the place and John kindly invited me to stay. The house had two storeys (actually, it was two separate apartments) and we lived downstairs.

Around that time, the government stopped providing me with sickness benefit money and instead offered me a job, which I was more or less obliged to take, working as a clerk in the Education Department of the NZ Government. The only interesting aspect of the job was that it was housed in the second largest wooden building[2] in the world (at that time). Architecturally it was glorious. Occupationally it was tedious.

Many interesting things did happen though at Tasman Street. The occasion which shines brightest in my memory is meeting Jutta Passler. One evening, during a get-together upstairs, one of the girls who lived there returned home from an event with a German woman she had met. It was Jutta. As soon as we were introduced we started talking, almost as if we already knew each other. It turned out that we had both been at the same encounter group weekend a few months earlier. It was a weekend being run by two good friends of mine, Dr. Jack Prichard and Helen Merriman, and as I happened to be visiting them at the time, they had taken me along. The conversation with Jutta that started that evening lasted for decades. Often I would visit her in Palmerston North where she was teaching French and German at the High School. Only some time later did I discover how thoroughly out of character it was for her to have me stay in her apartment. She was about 20 years older than I and lived an intensely private life. Her neighbours probably thought her eccentric.

When Jutta was eighteen years old she had been living in Dresden. It was the time of the horrendous firebombing[3]. Her mother had died in 1939 because penicillin wasn’t available in those days to the public. Her father had little time for her so, for a period during her teen years, she had been homeless. In 1945 she had found a place to stay at a girls’ hostel. During the day she was obliged to work at a factory and at night she would regularly help out at the railway station where large numbers of refugees were accumulating. They were fleeing from the Russians who were approaching from the north. On the thirteenth February, 1945, Jutta was staying at the hostel and had telephoned a friend to say she wouldn’t be helping out at the station that evening. It was that evening that the bombing began, and along with the other girls, she hid in the basement. At one stage she came up to look outside but then the second wave of bombings began. In a record of her life that Jutta shared with me, she says that as many as 120,000 people were killed. I don’t know how that accords with what was officially stated. The shock was indescribable.

She managed to survive the terror of those nights of bombing and then she had to somehow survive the hell of the aftermath. It doesn’t take a lot to imagine how life might be for an 18 years old German girl when she encountered the invading Russian soldiers. Many years later when she shared her story with me I could see how skilfully she had turned her struggles into great strength and great integrity.

After the war Jutta moved to live in Paris where she worked as a housekeeper for an American family. Later on they helped her move to live in California. Having obtained her Master’s degree she went on to live in Honolulu where she taught at the University, and then eventually, to New Zealand where she settled. On three different occasions over those years she met pilots who had flown in bomber planes during those Dresden raids. Jutta didn’t really mind if others thought her eccentric; she was interested not just in surviving, but in truly living. She was her own person. I am very, very grateful to have had such a fine friend. It was Jutta who introduced me to Macrobiotics, Martin Buber, Meister Eckhart, Constant Comment Tea, and Yellow Red incense – the latter still being burned today in the Dhamma Hall here in our monastery in Northumberland.

When Jutta discussed the topic of authentic being she often used the phrase, ‘the bigger the front, the bigger the back’, an expression she said she had learned from Macrobiotics, a discipline which focuses primarily on food but that aims at finding balance in everything. The expression refers to people who put up a big front in an attempt to hide something they haven’t yet learnt how to fully receive. It reminds me of an expression I believe is attributed to Prof. C.G. Jung, ‘The greater the radiance, the bigger the shadow.’ Jutta had suffered terribly, but resolutely refused to play the victim. She wasn’t into playing games. She wasn’t into putting up fronts. Several years later I was happy when she visited me in Northeast Thailand and had an opportunity to meet Tan Ajahn Chah. He called her Toyota (rhyming with Jutta).

Now back to Wellington.

There was one occasion when I spontaneously took off to visit an actor I had met, Simon, who had a job manning a fire lookout tower on Rainbow Mountain[4], near Rotorua. The only thing they expected of him was throughout the day to keep an eye out for fires in the surrounding forests. If he saw anything suspicious he had to call it in using the radio. Simon was an actor but was also writing plays. Being a fire-watcher seemed to suit him. During my visit there I came around to fancying myself perched up high in such a tower with nothing much to do all day long, so Simon set up a meeting with the Overseer. On the day I left to hitchhike back to Wellington, I met the Overseer at the base of Rainbow Mountain and we discussed possibilities. I let him know I was interested but he didn’t appear convinced I would make a good fit. He was right: I was attempting to put up another front. What I needed in fact was community.

My job doing accounts in the Education Department didn’t last long; instead I took another job driving a delivery van for a pharmaceutical company. Several of us from the house in Tasman Street moved to a place in Owen Street, near the zoo. I managed to get three months free rent since the previous occupants had left the place in such a filthy condition. The owner said they planned to eventually knock the house down anyway so we could be creative in renovating it. (That is how I interpreted what he said.)

Again it was a wonderful wooden house and this time it had generously high ceilings, at least by our standards. John lived out the back in what might have been the old servants quarters, Sally baked excellent cookies, Rob had an amazing sound system, Andrew was just a really sweet guy, and Jude was the intelligent one. I had a lot of fun stripping back some of the walls exposing the wooden panelling, painting other walls, constructing a kitchen and designing a playroom in which there was an open fire. It was almost too good to be true. We were a harmonious bunch and appreciated each other’s company. This was the time of The Yes Album, Emerson Lake and Palmer, To Our Children’s Children’s Children, and Ziggy Stardust.

John spent his time painting and drawing and sculpting. He is one of two people from that period with whom I have stayed in touch. Our lives went in different directions but there seems to be something we recognise in each other. Somewhere around 1977 or ‘78 he turned up in Thailand. Ajahn Pasanno and I both happened to be in Bangkok for some reason and were at Wat Boworn when one day John, or Bodhi as he was to be known, suddenly burst in. Clothed all in red, he had aligned himself with Rajneesh and was on his way to Poona in India. I am not quite sure how he knew where to find me though I am glad he did. These days I think he has an Advaita Vedanta teacher. Such friendships are precious. Thank you, Bodhi.

The second person from that period with whom I am still in touch, is Rob Green. In 1971 he was making money working on the Inter-Island ferry service between Wellington and Picton in the South Island. Curiously, in June 1980, almost as soon as I arrived at Cittaviveka Monastery in England, I received an unexpected phone call from Rob. He was taking part in a study program in a Tibetan Buddhist Institute in Britain. He happened to be there when Tan Ajahn Chah visited in 1979. These days Rob lives in Russia with his partner, and teaches English and we write from time to time.

My life was taking on a very different shape due to the influence of Jutta and Ram Dass. I suspect it was through Jutta that I was introduced to books written by Hermann Hesse: Narcissus and Goldmund, Demian and Siddhartha. The spirit of what he wrote was again congruent with what Prof. C.G. Jung and Marshall McLuhan had to say. Apparently in real life Professor Jung and Hermann Hesse were close companions. Already while living at Tasman Street I had started attending hatha yoga classes at a Centre in Aro Street. This helped get my damaged body back into working order. Maybe it was through that Centre that I also found out about a Mantra yoga group in which I began to participate. Having been inspired by Jutta’s dedication to the discipline of Macrobiotics, my breakfast in those days consisted of a bowl of plain boiled brown rice with some super healthy (unsweetened) home-made marmalade stirred in. My meditation practice, however, was sadly lacking in discipline; I was very restless.

One day, on the spur of a moment, I caught the ferry from Wellington down to Christchurch. I wanted to spend time with a fellow I had met at a music festival in Whanganui, John Britten[5]. The culture in New Zealand, at least back then, allowed for spontaneously turning up at someone’s house totally unannounced. My visit coincided with his taking a trip down the coast to deliver a car to a friend, so I joined him. John had a way with vehicles; not only did what he had built run well, his work was gorgeous. For instance he had converted an old truck into a stunningly beautiful caravan/mobile home, lined with kauri wood. It was a masterpiece. He was a character full of creative enthusiasm. Years later, by which time I was already the abbot at Aruna Ratanagiri, I reached out to reconnect, only to discover he had died shortly before my letter arrived. It was then that I found out about how he had gone on to create a world-famous handmade motorbike that achieved recognition at Daytona[6] and other racing competitions.

Back in Wellington I was beginning to have fantasies of setting up a pancake shop. This was not about serving delicate dainties sprinkled with icing sugar: what I had in mind would be made of wholemeal flour and more likely to be served sprinkled with alfalfa sprouts. The idea never got much traction. One night several of us went to a Ravi Shankar concert and met up afterwards with friends and discussed the possibility of such a shop, but the idea stopped there. What was great though about that particular evening (besides Ravi Shankar) was that those friends had just acquired a copy of the newly released Pink Floyd album, Dark Side Of The Moon.

1 Earthquake Map of New Zealand

2 Second largest wooden building

3 Firebombing of Dresden

4 Rainbow Mountain

5 John Britten

6 Daytona