# Heading North

The winter retreat that year lasted for the two months of January and February. This was the first time I had lived at Amaravati. I was invited to stay in a room often used by visiting senior sangha members, which meant that although the weather outside was cold and miserable, I was warm and comfortable, for which I was very grateful.

Although the accommodation and routine were agreeable, my mind was preoccupied with what I imagined might lie ahead at Harnham. Amaravati and Chithurst were sister monasteries in more ways than one. Regular exchanges of residents took place between the two communities, and they were both run by the English Sangha Trust. The monastery at Harnham was managed by a completely separate and independent body, these days known as Harnham Buddhist Monastery Trust[1].

I had visited Harnham monastery before, and I confess I found the buildings and the surrounding countryside somewhat bleak. That could perhaps have been because my visits coincided with the Kathina season which always falls in autumn. Whatever the reasons for my reservations, that retreat period gave me plenty of time to look and feel into where, when and how I was creating suffering out of something that I was only imagining. Perhaps it would all be wonderful, with a community of monks, novices and anagarikas living in a cooperative manner, with attentive trustees supporting the sangha – all in an effort to create something profoundly beautiful. Of course, I didn’t know.

Thankfully, part way through that retreat, I came to realize that many of my worries were a result of the way I held the idea of leadership. I have written in Servant of Reality[2], (p2) about how, one morning, while reflecting on the words of our morning chanting, I am a servant of the Buddha, I am a servant of the Dhamma, I am a servant of the Sangha, a fresh perspective on the idea of leadership opened up.

A wonderful feeling of relief came over me as I recognized how appealing I found the suggestion of being a servant. And how different holding that image in my mind felt, compared to the idea of being a master. It was obvious that I really didn’t want to be a master. I began to see the extent to which I had been struggling to try and master everything: trying to master my meditation, master my relationships, master my understanding of Dhamma. It was just deluded personality yet again, trying to control everything. I started to realize that not only did I not want to be a master, but nobody had ever told me that I had to be one. I could be a servant if I wished. With this recognition, a burden fell away. The unconscious commitment to compulsively controlling was seen just a little bit more clearly. My vision of Harnham, and whatever the future might hold, shifted significantly.

Being a leader of a community is a way of serving that community; it is not merely a way of controlling it. This change in perspective helpfully influenced how I would navigate the vicissitudes of community life over the following years.

There never had been any good reason for concern about what I would find when I arrived at Harnham. Amongst the six or so residents living there at the time was one with whom I was already somewhat acquainted. Tan Suriyo I had known as Robin when he was an anagarika at Chithurst and was my driver and chaperone on a number of occasions. He took monks’ Precepts at the same time as Tan Puñño, and I had the good fortune of being their mentor during the period of transition from anagarika to monk. There was also a particularly helpful anagarika from Boston, called Chris (these days known as Ajahn Jayanto). Tan Suriyo and he were from a similar part of America, and they each contributed to an atmosphere of goodness and integrity. Sometimes I imagine that in the future scientists will develop a way of measuring an individual’s integrity, similar to how these days they measure intelligence. Maybe in the future IQ will stand for Integrity Quotient. I estimate these two men would score very highly.

Another unexpected and agreeable aspect of the move was finding that there was a Dhamma Hall building project well underway. The initial work of excavation and outer construction was virtually all complete, and the building was now ready for the next, thoroughly pleasing, phase of interior design. It could hardly have been a more welcome task. Of course it wasn’t without its challenges. The first decision to be taken was regarding a large bay window that had been planned to sit behind the main shrine. From what I had learned in consultations at Chithurst, according to the Chinese concept of feng shui, there should never be a window behind a Buddha image. I cannot substantiate that in any way; however, the sense I have of how it would feel to be looking at a Buddha image with trees and possibly even people moving in the background, is not one of stillness. When I look at a shrine I want to feel stilled. So I took the decision to cancel the bay window project and had the construction workers continue building the wall all the way up, but leaving an opening on top for an atrium, so light would descend down from above the Buddha. The decision wasn’t met with the approval of everybody but I was unwavering. Nearly thirty years later, and I am still convinced it was the right decision. We don’t go into a spiritual sanctuary in order to gaze outside at the view.

Tan Vipassi and I considered very carefully how we should approach the period of my taking over as leader. The previous abbot, Ajahn Pabhakaro, as mentioned earlier, had been a helicopter pilot during the war in Vietnam. He was a tall and imposing figure. He spoke with a commanding sense of what was needed, and seemed to relish any opportunity to use a chainsaw. He and I could hardly have been more different. Understandably, it was going to take time for the resident sangha to get used to the style of this new leaner, quieter Kiwi abbot; also, the trustees would have to get used to yet another way of doing things. I was the fifth senior incumbent in the ten years the monastery had been running. Tan Vipassi and I decided that we wouldn’t change anything that wasn’t necessary for the first six months: just observe and wait until we had a good enough overall impression of the place and the people there. That decision worked well. As the weeks and months went by, a new configuration of community dynamics was gradually emerging, building work proceeded without too many hiccups, and everyone seemed to be cooperating well.

The month of May in that first year marked approximately ten years since Harnham Monastery had begun, and it felt fitting to have some sort of celebration. The occasion was modest but rewarding and I am pleased we did it. I was also pleased that the ceremony we organized later that year in September to celebrate establishing a sima boundary inside the new Dhamma Hall went so well.

Senior sangha members from various monasteries down south were invited. Eight handsome bodhi leaf-shaped ‘sima markers’ were carved by a local craftsman, along with eight large and very heavy stone spheres that were used in the formal designation of the sima boundaries. As at Chithurst, we went through the process of removing any possible previous sima boundary, and then established the new one. It was conducted with an attitude of dignity and respect as befits such an occasion.

It was also later in that first year, 1991, that the main Buddha-rupa for the Dhamma Hall arrived. When Ajahn Pabhakaro was still abbot, he had made arrangements for it to be cast in Thailand, and it was sponsored by a long-time looksit (disciple) of Tan Ajahn Chah’s, Khun Siri. On receiving notification that a half-metric-ton image was due to arrive, no small amount of trepidation was triggered within me. Over the years I had seen many large Buddha images that were far from inspiring to look at. The image that was about to arrive would grace our Dhamma Hall for ever; whatever it was, was what we would be bowing to from now on. Ideally, of course, one would be making an effort to maintain equanimity, but upekkha is a virtue in which I was, and still sadly am, undeveloped. I wanted our Dhamma Hall to be a space in which the Thais, Burmese, Sri Lankans and Westerners, would all feel uplifted when they entered. If the central Buddha rupa on the shrine looked garish and out of proportion, that was going to be difficult. I assume I knew enough about practice back then to appreciate that wanting was not the problem, it was clinging to wanting which led to suffering, but I wasn’t able to let go. I really, really wanted it to be inspiring, so I suffered accordingly.

On opening the crate, I saw that my concerns were, once again, groundless. The bronze Buddha image had been superbly crafted and cast; because of the unpolished finish, it had a slight green patina, the colour of the moss on the stone walls. Immediately upon seeing it I was relieved. Anumodana Khun Siri and everyone else who was involved in making this offering. I continue to work on developing equanimity.

1 Harnham Buddhist Monastery Trust

2 Servant Of Reality