# Heading For Asia

Before departing Australia I returned to Narada to dismantle my dwelling up on the ridge and bid farewell to friends. I think at that stage it was more excitement than trepidation that accompanied any ideas I had of what might lie ahead; truthfully, of course, I didn’t know. As a way of marking the departure and moving on, and also out of gratitude, I performed a little ceremony which involved lighting a candle and saying thank you for the place, the time and the precious opportunities that the community there had given me. I was leaving Narada a very different person from the one who had arrived a few months earlier. It had been my intention to pass on the usable canvas portion of the construction to someone else living at another community nearby; however in the process of dismantling the structure, part of the tent touched the candle and immediately caught fire. I rushed inside through the flames to save my backpack and passport, managing to escape just in time to sit on a log and watch the whole thing be consumed. I was lucky to get away with only a few burns on my forearms where molten burning plastic had landed; also, fortunately, I didn’t start a forest fire.

A fellow from across the valley called Ross had expressed an interest in accompanying me at least as far as Indonesia. So, with a mixture of adolescent enthusiasm and hidden anxiety, the two of us set off for Darwin. The journey wasn’t straightforward. Hitchhiking wasn’t as easy as we had hoped. At one point we gave up and boarded a train for part of the journey. It was primarily a goods train but there was one passenger carriage tacked on at the end. After travelling for quite some time, in what felt like the middle of nowhere, the train suddenly stopped. There was no explanation. Then after a while we discovered that at least one of the carriages ahead of us had come off the tracks and the train engine had uncoupled and gone on without us. Eventually, after a long wait and considerable uncertainty, another train did appear, presumably one that managed to lift the derailed wagon back onto the track, and we progressed to the next town where we disembarked.

We managed to get a ride on a delivery truck. After a long and rather uncomfortable journey sitting in the back amongst boxes of fruit, we arrived in Darwin. The place was hot and dusty and was not at all like Mullumbimby. In fact it felt rather red-necked and perhaps even unsafe. Besides the regular residents of Darwin, there were tourists there to observe the interesting ways of the Aboriginal people and a large number of backpacking travellers, presumably about to depart for, or returning from, Asia. One day, to my surprise, I spotted Bill Hamilton, the American from Sydney, sitting with a group in one of Darwin’s parks. We recognized each other, however we weren’t really friends, so a passing nod of acknowledgement was enough.

The cheapest flight headed in the direction we wanted to go was to Dili, the capital of Portuguese (East) Timor. West Timor was part of Indonesia as was West Papua. On arriving in Dili, as mentioned earlier, another bubble burst. For the first time I saw people who were actually poor, desperately poor. The rude awakening I received on entering Australia was on this occasion amplified manyfold; this was real culture shock. I was almost nauseous with a feeling of disorientation. This young man from Morrinsville was starting to struggle.

Not far out of town the authorities had provided a very basic shelter on the beach where backpackers like us could stay. As far as I recall it was free, or at least very cheap. Concrete floors, three walls and a roof, but it had a stunning view. Timor was the kind of location where they would film a James Bond movie: pristine sandy beaches, overhanging palm trees, sun and coral. Shopping in the open market was an adventure. Almost nobody spoke any English. It was the first time I had seen people chewing betel nut. Initially I thought they must have some terrible mouth infection and it was blood that they were spitting out. On the surface at least, everyone was smiling and seemed very friendly and accommodating.

Somebody or something had encouraged me to bring a pair of flippers, a snorkel and goggles with me to Timor – maybe because of the great diving available. I knew nothing about snorkelling but had equipped myself with the basics. One day I wandered quite far to a lonely beach, presumably so nobody would see me, and tried on the gear. Gradually I made my way out into the water and dived under. What a treat: the extraordinary beauty of being immersed in such an environment. The water was warm and I readily took to it, quickly becoming adventurous. Possibly the benign and relatively harmless world I had grown up in meant I was susceptible to feeling more confident in the water than I should have.

At one stage I noticed a large, attractive conch shell lying on the ocean floor. It was a long way down but greed and innocence together meant that I went for it. It turns out I misjudged how far down it was and how long I could hold my breath. I reached the conch shell and was on my way back to the surface but the shell was heavy: it was huge in fact, and kept pulling me down. I reached a point where I realized I had a choice: either hang onto this lovely object and risk drowning, or let go immediately and maybe make it back to the surface. Fortunately the latter motivation prevailed and I made it to the surface. Being a complete novice at snorkelling, as soon as my head was above the surface, I breathed in, forgetting to blow out the snorkel; instead of taking in air I took in a large gulp of seawater. That unsettled me even further, prompting me to make a dash for the beach. Unfortunately I omitted to take care walking over the coral, so the soles of my feet were shredded.

During the time living in the bush on the Narada commune I had regularly used Hypercal Tincture (a herbal remedy made up of Hypericum and Calendula). I believe it was this remedy that protected me from the sort of severe infection that some of the others suffered from because of leech bites and ticks. I have carried Hypercal Tincture with me ever since, and still use it. I ascribe the rapid healing of my painfully wounded feet on that occasion to that remedy.

The loss of access to calm and ease during periods of meditation I ascribe to my wrong understanding of how to skilfully approach meditation practice. Through wilful concentration of attention I had found out how to touch into some delightful inner spaces. However the way I had approached them, and the manner in which I related to those initial experiences, meant I couldn’t fully appreciate them. It is like a young person working hard at their first job, making some money, and then going out and spending most of it on getting drunk. Whatever hadn’t already been spent on alcohol was then stolen while they lay unconscious in a stupor. At that time in Timor I was confused and I didn’t really understand why. I hadn’t been drinking alcohol. Part of what was happening, however, was that I was feeding on sights, sounds, smells, tastes etc. in a way that meant my heart was being drained. I recall keeping a journal during that period of travelling and at one stage, I think a few weeks later, noting down, ‘I feel as if my eyes are locked in staring mode.’ The lack of restraint meant that my heart’s energy was being stolen. It turned out that getting a rush from staring into flowers was not such a skilful spiritual practice after all!

Ross and I didn’t stay long in East Timor and made arrangements to travel west, in the direction of Bali. When I think back now about how we travelled, it strikes me as rather foolhardy. We had heard or read somewhere that it was possible to hitch a ride on a military barge that would sometimes travel from Dili to a small East Timor enclave pocketed within West Timor. Incredibly (it seems now) the Portuguese military agreed to take us. So, along with a small handful of colourful fellow travellers and a barge-load of ethnic Timorese soldiers, we spent much of one day gently coasting along the north shore of East, and then West Timor, until we reached the enclave. The weather was perfect, the views stunning, the company somewhat questionable, but we made it. From there, a group of us hired a Four-Wheeler that drove us to Kupang, the capital of West Timor located at the western-most part of the island.

While waiting at the airport for a flight out of Kupang to Bali, once again I noticed Bill Hamilton. He had a connecting flight already confirmed so we just nodded and that was that. On arriving in Bali, Ross and I headed for an area called Legian, which is a short distance west from the most famous part, known as Kuta Beach. Already back in 1974, Bali was inundated with Australians, and Kuta Beach was the most densely populated. Legian, though still relatively nearby, was much quieter. We took a room in a losmen just back from the beach and started to settle in. A losmen is like a motel and ours was very modest but more than adequate. I imagine I was hoping that now we were somewhat more comfortable, my meditation would again give access to the clarity I had enjoyed during those first few weeks following the retreat.

One day, while I was relaxing on the porch of our losmen, a young Canadian fellow who was occupying the room next door, approached me and struck up a conversation. His name was Randal McCaw. He said he had noticed me sitting on the beach in the early morning and wondered what I was doing. I let him know I was meditating. He was happy to hear that and explained how he and his travelling buddy were also into meditation. In fact they had just done a course with this English monk, Ajahn Khantipalo, at Nimbin. Shortly after that he introduced me to his companion – it was Bill Hamilton. They must have been on one of the other courses that had been led around the time I was there. After all the earlier occasional meetings with Bill, it was good at last to make more of a connection.

My hope at the time was to be able to stay on in Indonesia for the full three months that were allowed, which involved a monthly visa renewal. Besides taking in the sights I might already have warmed to the idea of learning to do batik painting. Randal and Bill planned to stay for only one month and not renew their visas; they were keen to get to Thailand as quickly as possible. They might have been even more impressed than I was by what they gained from the meditation retreat. After Thailand, they planned to travel on to India. A few days later, when we parted company, I did not expect to see them again. My sights were still set on Japan.

Riding around on a motorbike was a normal way of seeing the island of Bali. After I had somehow managed to push aside the memories of the Gordonton accident, Ross and I hired a bike each. We headed off, initially to the village of Ubud. A German couple I had met during my time at Narada had lived near Ubud for an extended period of time and described it as an especially delightful spot favoured by artists. On the way there we stopped in the main town of Denpasar and bought some refreshments at the market. It wasn’t long though before we were very much regretting buying those delicious-looking cold drinks.

Our time in Ubud was spent almost entirely in bed. We were both violently ill. It went on for days. As I recall the only medicine that we had access to was of a home-made variety, generously offered by our host, the owner of the losmen. I’m not sure what substances he chewed up in his mouth before spitting it and massaging it onto our bellies; it smelt like garlic. Only years later was I introduced to the more effective medicine Ciproflox (Ciprofloxacin) and have carried it with me ever since on any significant trip I have taken.

Once we were well enough again to travel, we departed Ubud and spent a few days exploring the island. We were not, however, in very high spirits. That illness had taken a toll. Fortuitously, we met a couple of British expats who took pity on us and invited us to stay in their very lovely home where we were able to relax and regain some strength.