# The Missing Ingredient

After having lived at Wat Hin Maak Peng for several weeks, one evening, part way through a perfectly normal puja, a shift in perception suddenly occurred. Without trying to do anything in particular other than follow along with the chanting as usual, a joyous ‘just-so’ appreciation of an altogether new perspective on experience manifested. Years later, in an attempt to find words for that altered perception, I described it as a shift from finding identity as someone having this or that experience, to abiding as the context of all experience. Witnessing from this altered perspective, any and every experience that could ever arise, would be seen simply as ‘content’ within that ‘context’. It was joyous, unexpected, and felt profoundly significant, but at the same time utterly normal. There was nothing dramatic about this new perspective though at the same time it felt like it changed everything.

When I reflect back now on what happened that evening, I see there never really was any missing ingredient in my life. The struggle to find something that I hoped or assumed would make me feel OK, was never going to provide true satisfaction. What was needed was a shift in the way I viewed experience. That new perspective was the greatest gift I have ever received.

When the chanting session was over, I attempted to share with the translator monk something about what had occurred. I don’t think I said very much, but it was enough for him to suggest that I should explain what had happened to Tan Ajahn Thate. We gathered as usual at Tan Ajahn’s kuti. Initially everything went as usual, until my translator began to describe what I had shared with him. At that point Tan Ajahn stopped the massage and sat up. That was unusual: having the Ajahn interrupt his massage and address one of the most junior monks in the community. By this stage I expect my mind had returned to finding identity as ‘content’ again, nevertheless I tried to convey what had happened. Tan Ajahn Thate was encouraging and he said something along the lines of, ‘from now on your practice should be about remembering quicker and to not be caught up in all the activity of mind.’

The next thing I can recall was walking back to my kuti, and, similarly to what had happened at Wat Boworn a few weeks earlier, I started to reflect on the things I had just been saying. Very quickly my mind became possessed with self-doubt and guilt at the thought that I might have exaggerated the extent of my understanding and, in so doing, transgressed one of the monks’ rules about making an unfounded claim to a supermundane state. The terror that was released was indescribable. What had happened at Wat Boworn was like a heavy rain storm compared to this full-on hurricane, and the ferocity of this storm was beginning to wreak serious havoc throughout my body-mind. I had no idea such an intensity of mental and emotional anguish was possible. This was terror. The contrast between the sublime, selfless, incontrovertible OK-ness of earlier that evening and this devastating sense of being drawn down into hell, could hardly have been more pronounced.

Many years later, I came to appreciate that such an unexpected but profound opening as that which occurred during that evening puja, is not uncommon. Even without any specific spiritual preparation, it is not rare for people to find themselves spontaneously having to come to terms with such a completely new perspective on reality. It seems that for some people the heart remains open and they learn how to integrate this new way of seeing. Then there are others, like me, who go through a powerful shift in perspective and sense the beautiful possibility of living in expanded awareness, but then find their heart closes again, and they have to endure a period of painful disorientation. In the case of the latter, although the clarity that came with the expanded state was no longer accessible, something precious still remained. Perhaps it is like this: if we were to throw a pebble into a very deep well and listen until eventually we heard the sound of the splash as the pebble entered the water – afterwards, even though the sound of the splash has gone, an appreciation of the depth of the well remains. Whatever one might say about it, or however one might attempt to explain it, that shift is something for which I am deeply grateful.

The torture that followed did indeed wreak havoc in my physical, emotional, mental and relational worlds. Looking back now with hindsight, I can view it as at least in some ways cleansing. Some people carry with them what would classically be called a lot of old negative kamma. I prefer to think of it as old, unmet life. If you find yourself encountering such difficulties, the most helpful thing to do is resolve to learn how to meet it, receive it, allow it, until the lesson we need to learn has been learnt; at that point letting go might happen. In other words, resolve to take full responsibility for it. Desperately trying to let go of old unmet suffering is another way of trying to get rid of suffering; if we do that, then the burden is likely to become heavier. We would be wise to reflect on how the Buddha taught: ‘It is through not seeing two things that we remain lost: not seeing suffering and not seeing the cause of suffering.’ We need to learn to view suffering as our teacher, not as an obstruction – and to not merely pay lip service to this new attitude. What is called for is a radical re-education of perception so we come to view suffering constructively, not as a symptom of failure.

My burden was painfully heavy. Where did it come from? Was I that bad a person that I deserved to suffer so intensely? Fortunately, I was prepared enough to be able to endure it without making too big a mess. I could have been better prepared, but I could also have been much worse. The sense of belonging to a community that was worthy of respect was precious – likewise, the training in restraint that comes with the monastic discipline (vinaya). Then there was the structure of the daily routine: the chaos that prevailed in my inner world was made more manageable because, on the level of the outer world, things were so predictable and stable. The significance of this last point cannot be overestimated.

Fortunately I didn’t try to tell anyone what was going on. If I had, I imagine they would have been unnecessarily worried about me. This is not to say that having the right person who shared the same language and an appreciation for the psychological factors involved, wouldn’t have been helpful. Indeed that could have helped, but there wasn’t any such person around.

On the feeling level I was condemned to excruciating hell as a result of having done something unforgivably bad – that is, making an unfounded claim to a supermundane state. Conceptually I was intensely confused. Yet, in some dimension, perhaps we can say at a heart level, there was a feeling of trust that everything was OK. I had a dream during this period that gave me confidence. In the dream, which I can still recall, I gave birth to a child. As far as I was concerned, all was well, but what puzzled me was that my friends who were standing around were disappointed. They had expected the child to be a boy when it was a girl, or maybe a girl when it was a boy, either way they were disappointed. What I am not able to recall accurately now, is whether my translator told Tan Ajahn Thate about the dream, or I told him, or I came up with my own reading of what the dream was saying. Whatever actually happened, the message of the dream, as far as I was reading it, was that I had given birth to my practice, but the consequences would not accord with my preferences; things would not turn out how I had hoped or imagined.

The weeks and months, indeed years, that followed were either varying degrees of hell, or feeling as if I was about to fall into hell. I recall, after one painful period of sitting meditation inside my kuti, that when I walked outside, I saw that the Mekong river was still flowing by – and that provided me with some reassurance. The word that comes to mind when I try to recall the rest of my time at Wat Hin Maak Peng is ‘intense’. On one day I felt convinced that the biggest issue I had to grapple with was anger. Then on another day it would be fear, then greed. My digestion was not good, and gradually I was becoming emaciated. In the afternoon, some of the monks and novices would occasionally gather to brew up various concoctions to drink. If we were lucky there would be cocoa, and the brew-up sometimes extended to making fudge out of sugar, cocoa and salt. The day of my twenty-fourth birthday, approximately midway through the Rains Retreat, was one such occasion. I remember at the time thinking I was overdoing the consumption of fudge; I still had a lot to learn about restraint. In the middle of the night that followed, I was awakened to find the walls of my kuti seething with ants. Everything was covered in them – I was covered in them – and trying to brush them off was futile. Were they attracted by all the sugar I had greedily consumed? In that already heightened state of shame and anxiety, this incident only served to take my anguish to another level. Eventually I abandoned my kuti, took my robes and went to the main meeting sala and lay down on a mat on the concrete floor in a state of despair. I reflected on how this birthday marked the end of the second twelve-year cycle of my life. There seemed to be some sort of poignancy to this and to how I was feeling so racked with despair: there were thoughts of death in my mind.

I managed to survive the full three months of the Rains Retreat, though my emaciated condition had not escaped the attention of the other monks. Almost immediately after the retreat ended, the parents of my translator monk companion kindly offered to fly me down to Bangkok. When I took leave of Tan Ajahn Thate, his parting words were something like, ‘you are in a vulnerable condition, be careful.’ I didn’t hear his words as judgemental, but full of kindness and concern.

Soon after arriving at Wat Boworn I was taken to the Chulalongkorn Hospital and placed in a private room and prepared for all sorts of tests in an attempt to find out what was causing my physical symptoms. Apparently the King kept a fund at Wat Boworn that took care of the monks if they were unwell, and at some stage I was told that my stay was being paid for from that fund. I was unwell, but the nature of my illness was not obvious. Was it a parasite, or digestive problems, or was it old unreceived life coming to the surface waiting to be received? The clinicians were thorough and extraordinarily considerate, but in the end they found nothing. I returned to Wat Boworn feeling utterly dejected. This was the beginning of an approximately fourteen-year-long holding pattern of contained disorientation.