# Ready to Leave, Again

For all the fun we were having, there was still something really important missing. I felt far from contented. At some point Andrew (from Owen Street) and I hatched a plan to escape to Sydney. Whether Andrew saw it as an escape or not, I am not sure; he might have had other motivations. In my case, ongoing indulgence in heedlessness was undermining my confidence, and, perhaps similar to the way I left Auckland and left Hamilton, I now wanted to leave New Zealand.

Before departing I visited my parents who lived almost at the other end of the North Island near the Bay of Islands. After my father had a heart attack he had left his job managing the Ford garage and they went into semi-retirement running the General Store at the small seaside village called Opua. Opua was known internationally as a safe deep harbour where ocean-going yachts could conveniently moor long term. On one of my earlier visits to my parents, Greenpeace’s boat, the Rainbow Warrior had been moored there in preparation for one of their trips to Mururoa Atoll to protest against France’s testing of atomic weapons. Nobody knew at that time that in 1985 the French secret service would bomb and sink the Rainbow Warrior while it was moored in Marsden Wharf[1] in Auckland Harbour.

I suspect that by now my parents had started to accept that I was going to keep behaving in ways they didn’t understand. They still loved me, but there was almost no real communication between us. My visit home was not because I genuinely wished to see them; presumably I felt it was the right thing to do. That trip north also gave me a chance to say goodbye to a local potter, Peter Yeates, whose company I had enjoyed in the past. At the time he was collaborating with the artist Friedensreich Hundertwasser. Originally from Austria, Hundertwasser was well known, amongst other things, for his posters advertising the 1972 Munich Olympic Games[2]. In that part of New Zealand he was known for designing the extraordinary public toilets in Kawakawa[3].

Also, while I was up north, I took the opportunity to visit another commune I had heard about. It was situated not far away on the other side of the island at Waiotemarama, near the Hokianga Harbour. The commune had the rather grand name of The Foundation of Mankind. I managed to get a ride over there on the back of a motorbike and was pleased I had the chance to see it. There was energy and enthusiasm, though, thinking back about it now, I suspect they too were finding communal living not quite as heavenly as they had hoped. As Ajahn Sumedho has said, ideals are like stars, they are useful for getting your bearings, but it is not wise to expect to actually reach the stars. Ideals are also a good way of generating energy, but if we hold them too tightly, we will end up very disappointed.

1 Rainbow Warrior

2 1972 Munich Olympic Games

3 Public toilets in Kawakawa