# First Encounter with the Forest Sangha

It was that meeting with Ajahn Sumedho that motivated me to venture out of Bangkok up to Wat Nong Pah Pong, near Ubon, in the North East of Thailand.

After a long and slow train ride I arrived at the monastery at a time when the community were still out on morning alms-round. Just as I can’t remember much about arriving at the Narada commune in Australia, my memories of arriving at Wat Pah Pong are very hazy. I was left though with an impression that the sangha at Wat Pah Pong were not in the business of trying to attract newcomers. The first Westerner I met looked at me and said something like, ‘What are you doing here?’ My accommodation was a thin grass mat and a blanket in a corner of the meeting hall (sala) and no mosquito net. The linoleum-covered concrete flooring was a far cry from the plush red carpets of the temple in Bangkok. Not that I was overly enamoured of those plush red carpets, but this was towards the other end of the spectrum. Perhaps the reception I received had something to do with my wearing the robes worn in city monasteries, combined with my only being a samanera and belonging to the Dhammayuttika Sect. I had never been in the military, but this was how I would imagine it felt to be in boot camp.

I was told that Tan Ajahn Chah’s mother had died not long before, so regrettably he was not there during my stay. It was a relief to meet Ajahn Sumedho again and to find he was ebullient as ever; and of course it was good to meet up with Nehn Dhammiko. Some of the other Westerners were veterans from Vietnam who would have known about real boot camp.

The daily routine began with the morning bell being rung at 3 am. I had to quickly gather up my bedding and store it away before morning chanting. Here chanting was a lot longer than what I had become used to, as each line was recited in both Pali and Thai. After chanting we sat together in meditation for a painfully long period, before heading out on alms-round.

For the once-a-day meal, we sat in two long lines; I was almost at the very end with a group of young boy-novices below me. From the food we had received when we went out on pindapat (alms-round), we were allowed to keep as much rice as we wanted and the rest was given over to the community. Here it was the glutinous ‘sticky rice’ variety and everyone would make a large ball, perhaps four or six inches in diameter, and place it in the centre of their bowl. Several senior monks would then walk down the line and ladle a variety of curries, pieces of vegetable and, maybe fruit, into our bowls.

In the afternoon, after sweeping leaves and hauling water, the second chanting and meditation session began at 3 pm, and lasted for about one hour. From time to time, the silence of the sitting was interrupted by the eerie screech of a tokay gecko[1] – tokay, tokay, tokay, tokay, tok, tok, tok. When the rest of the sangha all departed, the Westerners remained in the sala for another four hours, alternating sitting and walking meditation. Sometimes we would be invited to gather around Ajahn Sumedho and listen to a reflection on the teachings.

Those Dhamma teachings were what I was looking for, however, I was having grave doubts about my ability to hack the austerities. The haziness of my memory around arriving at Wat Pah Pong extends to the full four or five days I was there. I do, however, recall that Nehn Dhammiko’s travelling companion, Randal (I forget his Pali name), was seriously unwell, and the only medicine he was receiving was a thermos of hot water in the evening which he could mix with a spoonful of Marmite. Whatever thoughts I might have had about my first visit to Wat Pah Pong, the feeling was one of intimidation. Several of the Western monks struck me as disturbed to the point of being frightening. One of them in particular was extra scary, and what made it worse was that he was being held up as an exemplar of mindfulness and restraint!

Did it really have to feel this heavy? Was there something wrong with me that meant I found it heavy? Was I going to be able to do it? I desperately wanted to be able to do it. Maybe this experience was helping me get just a little bit clearer about what it was I was looking for: it wasn’t the form. It wasn’t about another religious tradition or organization. One distinct impression I do still have is that when it came time to leave, I said that I looked forward to coming back: that might not have been completely true.

On the train trip to Bangkok I managed to get an object stuck in my eye. It was extremely uncomfortable. After a troubled night it was obvious that I needed medical attention. Almost the whole day was spent riding around Bangkok attempting to find the right person with the right equipment who was available to help. The offending object was a small piece of metal which, by that time, had already started to go rusty. Eventually we found the right person and, with my head clamped into a device that made sure I didn’t move, the eye specialist carefully drove a magnetic needle directly into the eyeball, gently extracting the slither of metal. This incident fittingly symbolized the long and painful process I had ahead of me of extracting many offending mental and emotional objects from my mind.

Despite that disappointing first encounter with the forest sangha, I don’t believe I was put off at all. A facility for burying disappointments was part of my character. Also I did have faith in the practice. Perhaps there were other ways of approaching the meditation monk’s life. For the time being anyway, it felt good to settle back into the less austere surroundings of Wat Boworn. The noise of the rowdy tuk-tuk taxis driving by outside the monastery were tolerable, as were the smells of food being cooked in the evening just on the other side of the monastery walls. I persisted in trying to learn the Thai language. An elderly monk who used to be a school teacher attempted to instruct me in reading and writing, but I really couldn’t get my head around it at all. When it came to repeating words that I heard, I was quite quick in picking them up; and since Thai, like Chinese, is a tonal language, that makes all the difference. I have met several Westerners who have an impressive grasp of the written Thai language, but they haven’t managed to get the significance of the tones. To a Thai person, even one who is well educated, they can have trouble imagining what a Westerner is trying to say unless the tones are accurate. One word in Thai, such as ‘kaaw’ (pronounced cow in English) can have five entirely different meanings according to the tone – high, low, rising, falling and neutral – and the length of the vowel sound.

In April 1975 both Cambodia[2] and Vietnam[3] fell to the Communists. Presumably this news caused trepidation in my parents in New Zealand. I was periodically sending them an aerogramme; from their perspective, my predicament must have seemed dangerous. Even though Bangkok is not that far from Phnom Penh and Saigon, the general population in Thailand appeared to be getting on with business much as usual. Perhaps if I had been able to communicate in Thai more competently I would have had a different impression. It does seem though that the Thai way is to try to avoid making any sort of problem out of anything unless it seems absolutely necessary. One of the first expressions everyone who visits Thailand learns is, mai ben rai, which translates as ‘never mind, it is not a problem’.

1 Tokay gecko

2 Fall of Phnom Penh

3 Fall of Saigon