# A Very Foreign Country

Andrew and I arrived in Sydney, Australia, shortly before my twenty-second birthday, September 1973. One of the first impressions I had was one of being shocked at the sight of police in Sydney’s airport carrying lethal weapons. The only real guns I had seen were for hunting rabbits or wild pigs; in New Zealand the police did not carry lethal weapons.

When we are shocked by something (and I don’t mean merely surprised) it is a sign a bubble we were living in has just burst. The bubble I had been living in was the idea that the rest of the world was some sort of slight variation on New Zealand. Unconsciously I assumed everywhere would be as peaceful and parochial as New Zealand. Although I guess I wasn’t aware we were parochial. Of course I had seen people-killing guns in movies and on television but only now realized that there are places where these guns are actually used. Eight or nine months later, another bubble would be burst when I flew from Darwin in the Northern Territories of Australia and arrived in what was then Portuguese Timor.

Besides feeling somewhat shocked at the airport I imagine I felt excited to be somewhere genuinely new. Not long before taking leave of New Zealand we had hosted a fellow, I think Canadian, at our place in Owen Street. He must have given us the address of where he expected to be staying in Sydney since, even though the address was a bit vague, we easily located the place and found ourselves being received at their apartment. An American guy called Bill Hamilton was part of the group living there and he mentioned that we could probably find work at the Darling Harbour Railway Station. He had a cushy job there spending much of the day folding tarpaulins. As it happened, I did get a job there without any difficulty; however, mine was loading beer kegs onto railway carriages.

Within a few days Andrew and I had found our own place to live in the suburb of Coogee (which is the Aboriginal word for ‘stinky’, because large quantities of stinky seaweed sometimes wash up on the beach there). Also, soon after we arrived in Sydney, an Australian fellow called John, took me to visit a Buddhist monastery, Wat Buddharangsee, in the suburb of Roselands. Maybe when we were staying in Bill Hamilton’s place, I had mentioned that I was interested in meditation and John had picked up on that. Meeting Buddhist monks for the first time was intensely intimidating. I imagined they would be able to read my mind and see what a fake I was. I suspect part of me really did want to be seen, but there was also a big part of me that felt like I couldn’t handle it. On that occasion I had the good fortune of meeting Luang Por Mahasamai who was Laotian by birth but had received his monastic education in Thailand. He had a big scar across his face that you couldn’t help but notice; he also had an even bigger and warm smile. That was the only time I visited Wat Buddharangsee until about five years later.

The next few months were spent accumulating funds so that I could travel north and join Jim and Roselberry on their commune near Mullumbimby. On one occasion when working at Darling Harbour Station there was another of those moments that stood out as significant. In truth I can’t say that the moment stood out at the time: it was only later that I appreciated how something valuable had been triggered. What was quickened in me was an appreciation for inner work: psychological and spiritual work. Of course the concept of doing your inner work was not new to me, but on this occasion something clicked and a sense of the significance of being committed to doing your inner work took on new meaning. The person I was assigned to work with that day was mumbling and grumbling about something that had upset him until he suddenly caught himself and said words to the effect, ‘I have to be more careful. I had forgotten that in situations when I feel let down by the tools that I am using, I easily overreact’. It was just that example of self-awareness that struck me. According to the conditioning I had received, the only things that really mattered in life were what you believed. If you professed to believe in the right things then all would be well, and if you believed in the wrong things then all would not be well. Although I would not have been able to articulate it at the time, now I see how that observation usefully brought into relief the lazy attitude that can become established in our minds if in our early education we fail to receive wise instruction. Although I can’t recall the name of my co-worker that day at Darling Harbour Railway Station, thank you.

When later on I became familiar with instructions offered by the Buddha I began to internalise faith in the law of kamma. It is not the case that anyone else can take responsibility for our actions; we alone carry that responsibility. The Buddha rarely criticized other religions but he was critical of teachings that undermine confidence in the law of kamma. What he endorsed was what he called citta bhavana, or cultivation of the heart, cultivation of awareness: doing our inner work.

After a few months in Sydney I packed my belongings into a backpack and headed north. I forget now how I travelled to Mullumbimby, probably by train, but arriving there felt like how I imagine Muslims must feel when they arrive at Mecca, or Christians when they go to Jerusalem.

Roselberry had told me to make my way to The Sunflower Cafe and ask for directions to the Narada commune, which I did. I seem to recall the intensity of emotions I was feeling was dizzying: joy at seeing beautiful, colourful, long-haired, bearded members of the back-to-the-earth community mingling with the local population; along with hope that perhaps I was about to find a place where I might fit in, mixed with the fear that it might not work out. A potent cocktail of expectation.

The image I have now of The Sunflower Cafe is that it was full of the fragrance of patchouli oil, beautiful smiling men, women and children, bright colours, stained glass, shelves filled with organic produce, pottery, hand-woven shawls, and walls displaying artwork for sale. The folk working there helpfully pointed me in the direction I needed to go to reach Upper Main Arm where I would find the Narada commune.

It puzzles me that I can remember almost nothing about my arrival at Narada, but this was my first experience of the Australian countryside, and probably the sun, the heady aroma of the eucalyptus trees, combined with the sounds of the otherworldly wildlife, all were somewhat overwhelming. I do however have an impression that Jim and Roselberry might have given the community members an exaggerated report of me since they welcomed me almost like family.

There were five or six couples on the commune which comprised approximately 200 acres of undulating land. It had previously been farmland but was now covered in lush, subtropical, secondary growth, mostly varieties of eucalyptus with dense undergrowth of lantana. Mount Warning was not far away to the north and there was a stream that meandered along one boundary of the property. Except for a couple who lived in the main communal house near the entrance, all the others had their own portion of the property that they occupied and their own residences. All were Australian, several from Melbourne, some ex-teachers and others artists, and most had known each other for quite some time. Clearly they were embracing ideals of cooperative living, but there was also a decent dose of common sense. For instance, each member of the commune held shares in the company that owned the property. It wasn’t automatically assumed that I would be invited to live there but they went out of their way to include me in activities. I wasn’t treated like an itinerant visitor.

The thing that took time and considerable effort to accommodate was the unfamiliar wildlife. The screaming kookaburras weren’t any trouble, they were fascinating; it was the snakes, the goannas, stinging ants, poisonous spiders, leeches and ticks that got to me. New Zealand bush, by comparison, is totally benign. In New Zealand you can walk out into the bush, pitch a tent and lie down almost anywhere without any bother (other than from sandflies). I was used to camping and roughing it a bit, at least that is what I thought, but here, in this very foreign land, there was always something trying to sting me or bite me. Many of the creatures and critters were deadly poisonous!

Jim took me to a location a short distance further along the ridge from where he and Roselberry lived and said it would be alright if I wanted to construct a small residence there. From that ridge it was possible to look down the Upper Main Arm Valley over Byron Bay to the ocean. I had brought a modest sized tent with me, so over the next few days, using canvas, bamboo, plastic sheeting and a variety of posts and poles, I constructed myself a dwelling. This was to be my home for the next few months.

Life at Narada was a mixture of fun and hard physical labour. The hard labour in my case mostly involved hauling water up the hill to my dwelling. This was the first time in my life I had to genuinely exercise restraint in the amount of water I used. It became clear that even here, living the beautiful life with beautiful people, took a lot of effort. Maybe I actually started to grow up at that point and appreciate that what you put in is what you get back. Also there was work assisting other community members with projects they had on the go. One of the residents was still finishing his geodesic dome and needed assistance.

Nearly all the fun times involved music. The Main Arm Valley was strewn with New Age communities of different shapes and sizes. A variety of excellent musicians passed through. There was little need for shopping other than for food. That required only a very occasional trip into Mullumbimby; once I ventured as far as Lismore to source some hardware: cooking equipment, tools etc. There was an abundance of fruit available growing in the valley, especially bananas – so many bananas! Every so often there was a barter market where members of the different communes would meet and exchange produce. As I recall, the ideal was that no money would be exchanged, though I suspect that was one ideal not held too tightly.

After several weeks of settling in, I received a visit from Danny, a very short, very jolly chap from Texas, whom I had met in Sydney. He was on his way to participate in a Buddhist meditation retreat due to take place a few miles away to the west, at Nimbin. I think there was some connection between Danny and John who had taken me to visit Wat Buddharangsee. This retreat was to be led by an English monk, Ajahn Khantipalo, who was usually resident at that temple in Sydney. Danny wanted me to join him on retreat since a spare place had opened up. Although reading The Way Of Zen the year prior had inspired me, the idea of getting involved with another organized religion was as appealing as a splitting headache. Danny was very persuasive however and I did end up joining him. That seven-day silent meditation retreat turned out to be one of the greatest gifts I ever received.