# A Relief to Be in Britain

Unfortunately, family commitments meant that Mason and I didn’t manage to meet up in Los Angeles, we only spoke on the phone. The monks at the Wat Thai temple were helpful in providing a place for me to break my journey. Then on 10th June I arrived in Britain. On exiting the airport I had a sense of relief; somehow I already felt safe in this country and was glad to be here. A friend of the sangha, Paul James, was waiting to drive me to the monastery in West Sussex. It was not long before I met Ajahn Sumedho, and he was still his ebullient self. He immediately took me on a tour of the property, which included not just the impressive mock Tudor Victorian mansion of Chithurst House[1], but also the nearby substantial forest and lake property. On that particular day there was work being done on the weir at one end of the lake. It was known as Hammer Pond, because in the seventeenth century the water spilling over the slipway drove a hammer which was part of an iron forge. One of the people busy working on the repair of the ancient weir was Chris, a Kiwi fellow who later took Precepts as a monk with the name Tan Thitapañño.

Earlier I have described the atmosphere during the first years at Wat Pah Nanachat as a combination of focussed spiritual aspiration, pioneering spirit, and New Age adventure. Life at Chithurst was much the same, but was a great deal more ‘yang’. For one thing, the climate was cooler, and there was almost an urgency to community activity. Instead of everyone wearing only a lightweight waistcloth and flimsy angsa, here people wore a lot more clothes; instead of crochet hooks and whittling knives, here it was chainsaws and concrete mixers.

The large room in which I would be staying overlooked the bucolic countryside of that part of West Sussex. I would be sharing the room with Tan Sucitto. He went out of his way to be hospitable and expressed concern for my welfare. Tan Sucitto had spent time living in a meditation monastery in Thailand but, at that stage, had never visited Wat Pah Pong or Wat Pah Nanachat. As I said, he was very attentive to my well-being; he did strike me as a bit of an enigma though. I had trouble getting any sense of what made him tick. Over the years that followed, a friendship developed between us, based on trust. It turned out that he similarly didn’t quite know what to make of me, and that didn’t matter. Trust and respect were more important.

Throughout all the years I have been living in the UK, I have felt grateful for the privilege: grateful and extremely fortunate. Although the English themselves excel when it comes to criticising their own institutions and traditions, personally, I find it easy to heap praise on the country; since arriving here I have never wanted to live anywhere else. I do confess, however, that it took me about twenty-five years to eventually admit how inscrutable I find not just the English, but the British as a whole. As a country, they obviously understand each other, but even after several decades I remain mystified. They almost never say anything directly – rather, there are hints and innuendos that one is supposed to interpret. It is not surprising that I have been told more than once that some find my Kiwi character a bit coarse. It was naive of me to not admit sooner how often I have struggled to find my place in the situations in which I find myself. The truth was that I was feeling excluded, and I didn’t want to admit that. When eventually I did admit it, it was a relief, and didn’t seem to matter too much. This wonderful country is full of misfits and, to me at least, there seems to be an admirable willingness to tolerate people who are different. Of course, at the same time I am aware that in Britain, as in other countries, there is a lot more that could be done to address inequality on many levels.

Perhaps this hesitation to admit feeling like I didn’t fit in is similar to the way we refuse to admit to ourselves that one day we will die; by that, I mean that we habitually lie to ourselves about things we find difficult to acknowledge. Out of wisdom and compassion, the Buddha instructed his followers to regularly reflect on the inevitability of their demise. Those who heed his instructions are sometimes surprised at how good it can feel to own up to that fact. It can release a lot of energy when we stop lying to ourselves. I intend to later reflect more on this aspect of teachings by the Buddha and how they have impacted upon me.

1 Chithurst House