# Getting Ready to Leave

It was indeed good fortune to have been born into a family that appreciated the importance of goodness, but when I was seventeen years old, which was my age in 1969 when we moved from Morrinsville to Kaikohe, I was completely unaware of the power of wisdom. I was also unaware of why we were moving. Perhaps it was because of my father’s work or perhaps there were other reasons. He had been given a new job managing another Ford garage. David had already left home. For me, Jennifer, and our younger brother Bryan, it was just a case of being told that this is what was happening: a new town, a new school and of course a new church.

There are only a few things I remember about Kaikohe since I was there for less than two years. I do remember that there are thermal hot pools just outside of the town, called Ngawha Springs. It was worth putting up with the almost overwhelming stench of rotten eggs for the sake of the soak in the steaming hot water. I had my driver’s license by then and although I can’t be sure, I suspect my mother lent me her car so I could go out there. At the time I was also hoping that the mud we slopped all over ourselves would cure my embarrassing acne. Usually I would go there with a guy called Guthrie whom I had befriended from school. We were about the same age and went to the same church. These days he is married to my sister.

That was the year I was admitted to hospital with mumps, meningitis and suspected pancreatitis. During the school holidays I had gone back to Morrinsville for a visit and ended up in the intensive care unit of the nearby Waikato Hospital. The condition was as serious as it sounds and there were good reasons for putting me into intensive care. As part of the regime that the doctors put in place to manage this threatening condition I was on pethidine, which possibly contributed to the fog I now think of when I try to recall the episode. Thankfully I recovered, though according to practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine, the high fevers that go with hepatitis and this latest batch of illnesses, might have done damage to my kidneys. At the time of writing this I am nearly seventy years old so the damage mustn’t have been too severe.

As part of the education offered at the college in Kaikohe our class was taken to visit the nearby Moerewa abattoir. The grotesque sights I witnessed on that occasion remain etched in my mind. Now I find it takes effort to register that members of the human race of which I am a part would choose to conduct themselves in the ways that the workers at that abattoir did, and probably still do. These days, when the subject of vegetarianism comes up, I am cautious in what I say since it is easy for groups of people to become divided according to views on matters such as diet. I do, however, sometimes subtly suggest that anyone who eats meat ought to visit an abattoir and see where what they consume comes from and take on board the implications. The hideousness of the industry, the harm it inflicts on countless animals, is only part of the story; there is also the damage the workers are inflicting upon themselves. Sadly, such conduct has been considered normal for so long that many people never stop to question it. I believe that for there to be any hope of rescuing the human race, and planet earth, from the self-destructive trajectory it is on, it will require a radical transformation of the attitude of entitlement many humans appear to have. It seems to me not feasible that we can continue to treat other living beings in such an insensitive and disrespectful manner without disastrous consequences.

It was also around 1969 that I was introduced to the thinking of the Canadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan[1]. Through the Presbyterian church in Kaikohe I had become aware of a Christian youth conference to be held in Christchurch in the South Island. It was on the theme of communication. The poster announcing the conference quoted from Marshall McLuhan and it piqued my interest. It said something to the effect, ‘I am an investigator. I make probes. I have no fixed position.’ This contrasted appealingly with much of the dogma that, up until that point, I had been obliged to go along with. So thank you, Marshall McLuhan.

I attended the conference and still recall how inspired I was to learn about the process of communication. It was pointed out, as I recall, that communication is not the same thing as expression. We can express ourselves, but that doesn’t mean those who bear witness to our expression know what we are saying. If we wish to effectively communicate we need to begin by clarifying for ourselves the message we intend to get across; then there is the process of encoding that message, of transmitting the message, receiving the message and finally decoding it. At any stage in that process there can be disruption resulting in miscommunication. Whether I read his work at that conference or later on I am not sure, however I am still influenced by what Marshall McLuhan had to say in his The Medium is the Message. It was he who coined the term ‘global village’ and readers of his works these days might be surprised to find how pertinent the points he makes are in light of our current global crisis.

That period in Kaikohe was the end of my high school education and, once again, I entered the Rotary speech contest. This time the topic of my speech was, Is the purpose of religion to be comforting or challenging? I believe I gave a good speech and again reached at least the semi-finals if not the finals, but the judge scored me down because I argued the point that religion is supposed to be both: religion ought to equip us with well-being in order that we can meet the inevitable challenges of life, or something along those lines. He said my talk wasn’t accurately addressing the topic. Never mind, it gave me some good experience so that later on when I found myself as the abbot of a Buddhist monastery I wasn’t totally unprepared for speaking in public.

1 Marshall McLuhan