# First Rains Retreat

It was probably in June 1975, not long before the beginning of the Rains Retreat for that year, that Tan Dhammachando and I travelled to Wat Hin Maak Peng. We were received in a friendly manner by the monks that we had met earlier at Wat Boworn and were given our accommodation. I was to be staying in the meditation hut (kuti) that Phra Somdet had lived in, which felt like an honour. During the initial period there, we would bathe each evening in the Mekong River which flowed gently by, just beneath my kuti. The point where the monastery was situated was one of the narrowest sections of the river and it was easy to see Laos on the other bank. Shortly after we arrived, however, the Russians invaded Laos and it was deemed too dangerous for us to bathe there anymore, so we had to walk inland a short distance to a stream. There were times when the Russians could be seen speeding by in their boats and at night tracers could be seen being fired. On one occasion a farmer who apparently held property on both sides of the river – in Thailand and in Laos – was shot at whilst attempting to bring his tractor back across into Thailand. I think his tractor ended up sunk in the river.

Not long after we arrived at Wat Hin Maak Peng, the two of us were invited to come to Tan Ajahn Thate’s kuti. As I recall, the teacher asked us a little bit about our understanding of practice and then offered us advice. The instruction and encouragement he gave us continues to this day to inform my effort in practice. He told us that the primary task in practice is to learn to differentiate between the heart and the activity of the heart, awareness itself and the activity taking place within awareness. This was a simple but truly precious gift of Dhamma.

My grasp of the Thai language was still minimal so I depended on a translator to understand when the Ajahn gave talks. The very few books in English that I had with me proved to be a valuable source of inspiration. I was committed to making progress and felt fortunate to be in such a supportive environment. The booklet of Questions and Answers with Tan Ajahn Chah that I mentioned earlier was extremely helpful; it was clear and succinct. Much of my time was spent in silent sitting and walking meditation. Every few days, I would attach to one of the pillars under my kuti a verse from the treatise, On Trusting In Mind, by Master Tsen Tsan; then, as I walked up and down, I would contemplate it, and in the process, commit the words to memory (although I don’t think I reached beyond the initial few verses).

Tan Ajahn Thate, by that time, was about seventy-three years of age and had already been diagnosed with leukaemia. His health was a subject never discussed with me, but I was aware that he was limited in how much he could take on. It didn’t stop him from doing his walking meditation or being available in the evening for a very vigorous Thai-style massage. Outwardly his appearance was extremely gentle and his voice was high-pitched to the point of being almost squeaky. However, when the Thai monks and novices massaged him, they would dig their elbows deep into his muscles with a force that even a young person might not be able to tolerate. Despite outer appearances he was very strong and lived until he was ninety-two years of age[1].

Within the sangha of forest monks in Thailand there is a beautiful tradition of, just around the time of the beginning of the Rains Retreat, many monks taking the opportunity to visit elders in nearby monasteries, to pay their respects. For the sangha at Tan Ajahn Thate’s monastery that meant we went to visit Luang Por Kaaw who lived relatively nearby. Such occasions are highly ritualised, starting with the visiting sangha offering a tray of candles, flowers and incense, and then requesting forgiveness from the elder for any wrong-doing. The elder then reciprocates by asking for forgiveness from the visiting sangha. More or less the same sequence is performed with each elder; what might vary would be the degree of conversation that followed the ritual. I don’t remember now, but it might have been that we visited other elders on that occasion, though Luang Por Kaaw is the only one I recall. The lasting impression I have of that visit is that I was privileged to have the opportunity to pay my respects to him. Also I have an impression of meeting someone with extraordinary dignity and strength. His body was very frail by this stage. Although he and Tan Ajahn Thate were both disciples of Tan Ajahn Mun, and would probably have been considered as contemporaries, Luang Por Kaaw was a lot older. It is difficult to estimate the degree to which one might be influenced by spending time in close proximity to highly purified beings, and I am cautious to not invest too much in speculation; however, I don’t dismiss the possibility that such association can have profound consequences. If one is susceptible to being influenced, or if kammic affinities are involved, spending any time in the company of great beings can be a great blessing.

Back at Wat Hin Maak Peng, even though we were aware of the unwelcome activity taking place on the other side of the river, life in the monastery was peaceful and calm. Gradually I felt like I was settling into a comfortable enough daily routine: morning alms-round, meal, rest, meditation, bathing, puja – ending the day with gathering at Tan Ajahn Thate’s kuti for the massage. That was all about to change.

1 Ajahn Thate