# Returning to Chithurst

During my time down in Devon, Ajahn Sumedho and a substantial portion of the sangha had moved to live near Hemel Hempstead, north of London, where they were engaged in building a new monastery, to be called Amaravati[1]. The move came about because of the significant increased activity at Chithurst, including growth within the nuns’ community. After considerable discussion a decision was made to find another place that would not only accommodate an increasing number of resident sangha members, but could also serve as a facility that provided resident retreats for laypeople. Because of planning restrictions imposed on the Chithurst property, retreats for large numbers of lay guests were never going to be possible. Hiring conference centres always felt like a bit of a compromise. It would have been alright to continue hiring conference centres, and in some ways it might have been more convenient; however, given the need to expand anyway, finding a much larger property seemed sensible.

Initially, after Ajahn Sumedho left, Ajahn Tiradhammo led the community at Chithurst; after about six months, Ajahn Anando, who had been living in Harnham, came back to take over. For most of the year in those days there was a small community of nuns also resident at Chithurst, in the cottage next to Hammer Wood, but during the Rains Retreat they were all together at Amaravati.

As the years passed, more options for spiritual development were opening up throughout Britain, and in presumably the Western world. Teachers within the Burmese tradition of U Ba Khin already had centres established in Britain before we arrived. More yoga groups and meditation groups seemed to be opening up all the time. Just a few miles away was Brockwood Park, the Krishnamurti Centre. Still there seemed to be a steady stream of guests passing through Chithurst, with some asking to stay and take up monastic training. The monastery appeared to be serving a particular need.

One of those visitors, in 1986, was Andrew Walker. Having recently completed a degree in Comparative Religion at the university at Bristol, he was driving back to his parents’ place up in Yorkshire. He took the opportunity to stay for three nights at the monastery, and, in conversation with me, mentioned he was interested in taking up the anagarika training. About two years later, in April 1988, he requested the eight precepts of an anagarika at Amaravati. These days, as Ajahn Puñño, he is a valued member and dear personal friend, living as part of the sangha here at Harnham.

Also during that period while I had been in Devon, Ajahn Viradhammo had moved to New Zealand and was busy building Bodhinyanarama Monastery in Stokes Valley, just north of Wellington; Ajahn Tiradhammo had moved to Harnham, in Northumberland. Towards the end of 1986, Ajahn Sumedho invited Ajahn Anando to accompany him on an overseas teaching tour which would include the U.S. and New Zealand. That meant I was left to lead the sangha at Chithurst during the Winter Retreat of 1987. It surprises me now, when I think back about that period, that I was not more intimidated by such a turn of events. We were still in a pioneer phase of development and there was a lot that kept changing. I can’t say I felt particularly confident, but neither was I terribly daunted. In some ways the whole thing felt like a shared adventure. To call what we were doing an experiment feels like it trivializes the intense effort people were making. It was a daring exploration of the unknown inner worlds in an increasingly secular society.

During the Rains Retreat of the previous year, Ajahn Anando and I had spoken about the possibility of asking Ajahn Sumedho to change my name. I had never found the name that I had been given back in 1976, ‘Tan Uppanno’, at all inspiring; it literally means ‘manifest’ or ‘arisen’. Compared with names such as Tan Anando, ‘the great blissful one’ or Tan Sucitto, ‘the beautiful-hearted one’, I felt just a little hard done by. Besides, it also sounded weird. I mentioned to Ajahn Anando that one of the other monks who took Precepts at the same time as I did, Tan Puriso, had once asked Tan Ajahn Chah about receiving a new name. His name, Puriso, translated as ‘man’. Apparently Tan Ajahn Chah had said something like, come and see me again when you have been a monk for ten years. By 1987 I had been a monk for ten Rains Retreats. Also there had recently been a notable improvement in my health, and somewhere I had read, or heard that in certain Buddhist cultures, under such circumstances, people might take on a new name. In the end, nothing came out of those discussions since, as far as I recall, neither of us was minded to approach Ajahn Sumedho about it.

Hence it came as a surprise when, part way through that Winter Retreat, I received a card from Ajahn Anando, who was with Ajahn Sumedho somewhere in the U.S. He explained that Ajahn Sumedho happened to mention to him that he wanted to do something supportive for Tan Uppanno. That gave Ajahn Anando an opening to tell him that I would be grateful for a new name. We had already discussed a few possibilities which Ajahn Anando was able to remember, so Ajahn Sumedho selected the name Munindo. It was also during that Winter Retreat that the sangha of monks at Chithurst presented me with a new robe which they had sewn.

Improved health, receiving a new name and a new robe, all gave me strength; and I needed it. Most of the sangha members there at the time were very new to the training, and that called for a certain quality of attention. And leading a two-month long meditation retreat wasn’t the only thing happening; as I mentioned, there was a lot that was changing. Along with the relocation of many community members to Amaravati, much of the management had gone too. It was taking time to get things running smoothly. I remember how during that retreat we received notification that various bills, including the telephone, were not being paid (by the administrator now located at Amaravati). Also around that time, one of the leaders of the community of lay supporters was manoeuvring to establish an alternative structure to the English Sangha Trust. Looking back now, such events appear to be not such a big issue; however at the time they did contribute to a perception of pressure. It would still be many years before there was the option of setting up a Skype call with a senior sangha friend, who was teaching in San Francisco and benefitting from their counsel.

As it happened, not only did we survive, but lessons were learned, and now I can appreciate them. It is bound to happen over and over again on this spiritual journey, that practice will take us to the point where it all feels too much. We have to get used to it, and stop resisting. Saying ‘it shouldn’t be this way’ is not what Tan Ajahn Chah taught. Rather, we need to learn how to turn perceptions of outer pressure into inner strength and increased competence.

After Ajahn Anando returned, he, Tan Vajiro and myself settled into a rhythm whereby the three of us took turns in visiting and giving talks at various meditation groups that had become associated with the monastery. Sometimes this meant going by public transport up to London; at other times a lay friend of the monastery would drive us down to the south-coast; Brighton or Southampton. It might have been because of one of those teaching trips that I found myself in London on that fateful night in October 1987, when a powerful hurricane tore through southern England. According to a BBC article[2], eighteen people were killed in that storm. A couple of days after the storm, when it came to trying to get transport back to West Sussex, we found most of the routes were blocked. A large number of trees had come down, resulting in a great deal of damage. Eventually I think I managed to get a train or bus, via Heathrow, down to Southampton, where a supporter, who was a member of the Laotian community there, picked me up and drove me to Chithurst. From the road approaching the monastery we could see that the massive Cedar tree, which had once stood close to the main house, was no longer there. The question was, which way had it fallen. Fortunately, it had fallen away from the house. Had it gone in the opposite direction it could have taken out at least half of the house, and possibly have caused serious injury or even death.

On the positive side, timber from that cedar tree was milled and stored, and eventually used to construct desktops and surfaces in the old granary when it was converted into the abbot’s residence. Perhaps even more positively, a good number of the oak trees that had come down in Hammer Wood were milled, dried, and, a few years later, sent to Harnham to form the floor of their new Dhamma Hall. I expect that all happened because of Ajahn Anando’s considerable generosity. There is no doubt that the Harnham sangha were very grateful. Such beautiful thick oak planks would have cost a fortune to purchase.

1 Amaravati Buddhist Monastery

2 Great Storm 1987: The day 18 people were killed