# A Reorientation

Previous moments of insight and reflection that had spontaneously occurred in my life were all surface level shifts in perspective compared to what happened on that retreat. They had been like a thick fog momentarily clearing, indicating that there was in fact some sort of a path worth following. The shift that occurred on the third day of that retreat was like a real signpost, and it precipitated a fundamental reorientation of my life. It indicated clearly the goodness and clarity that are potentially available. Looking back now I see this episode as representing the beginning of my learning to communicate in a new language. It was the language of the heart and not just of the head. It is not really possible to live the spiritual life if we are still trying to find our sense of identity/security in our heads, in mere approximations.

Without my knowing it at the time, this was also the beginning of my first concrete experience of the pitfall known these days as ‘spiritual bypassing’ (more on that later).

It is difficult to be objective about what happened. For some beginners in meditation such an experience might not have seemed special at all, just a brief acquaintance with a somewhat deeper sense of contentment. In my case, by comparison with the ordeal I had been going through, it was a wonderfully significant encounter with inner potential – one I had not the vaguest idea was possible.

Ajahn Khantipalo was very enthusiastic and generous in his efforts to encourage the practice of formal meditation. The retreat I attended was just one of a series of five or maybe seven retreats in a row that he taught there at that old farm house just outside Nimbin. We began each morning sitting quietly listening to a tape recording of a group reciting one of the names of the Buddha, to the tune usually used in Pure Land Buddhism in praise of Amitabha. This was followed by alternating periods of sitting meditation, walking meditation and supportive talks by the teacher. There was a break for breakfast and another for lunch. It was my first experience with the disciplines of not eating after midday, keeping silent, and not making eye contact. I don’t recall resisting the discipline. That is not to say I found the seven days easy. Perhaps I already had a degree of faith in the Buddha because I did take it seriously.

On the third day, during a period of walking meditation, having been diligent in my effort to concentrate, I noticed that my mind was quieter than usual. At that point the voice inside me that likes commenting on everything, came up with the observation, ‘there is just awareness’, or it might have been, ‘there is just knowing.’ This was almost immediately followed by an enquiring voice, ‘but who is aware?’, or ‘who knows?’, at which point it felt like the mind dropped. That shift in perspective was the signpost. A quality of peacefulness appeared that seemed to require no maintenance: it was just there, and I fell into it. There were no drugs involved, no group therapy dynamics; the main thing seemed to be an adjustment in the quality of attention.

When thinking about it afterwards, as I definitely did, the image that came up was that our experience of existence is similar to focussing the lens of a camera. What is most important is not so much having to keep changing the objects of attention, but rather whether or not we can view those objects clearly; and that clarity, or lack of it, does not depend on anyone or anything outside of ourselves.

Great gratitude to Ajahn Khantipalo, and thank you, Danny. What would have happened in my life if I had stubbornly resisted the invitation to go on that retreat?