## PREFACE

This small book is the third in a series of four, consisting of reflections and practices related to the ‘sublime abiding places for the heart’ – the four brahma-vihāras, in Buddhist parlance. These qualities are also known as ‘the four immeasurables’ on account of their boundless nature.

The vision for the series is to explore these sublime abidings via the somewhat oblique approach of looking at what counters or muddies their activity. The four brahma-vihāras are listed in the Buddhist scriptures as:

Mettā – loving-kindness, benevolence, radical acceptance, non-aversion.

Karuṇā – compassion, empathy, appreciation of the suffering of others.

Muditā – sympathetic or altruistic joy, gladness at the good fortune of others.

Upekkhā – equanimity, caring even-mindedness, serenity amid all turbulence.

In this third book we will be investigating muditā through the lens of self-centred desire and its relationship to dissatisfaction; how the quest to fulfil personal cravings leads not to joy but rather to pain-haunted addictions; how joy, instead, comes from unselfishness, giving and consciously delighting in the blessings that others have; how those blessings of others need not feed a sense of lack or unworthiness in us but rather, marvellously and mysteriously, be a contributor to our own well-being.

The principle framework the Buddha used to describe the addictive process and its cyclical nature is known as ‘Dependent Origination’ so this will be used as the matrix around which these reflections on craving, suffering and altruistic joy are formed. The other three books in the series similarly explore the remaining brahma-vihāras through aspects of mind and behaviour that oppose or confuse them.

The material published in this book is mostly based on Dhamma talks given at a ten-day retreat at Amaravati, in July, 2013. As with all such retreats, and as with all teachings offered in the Buddhist tradition, the words here are presented for the reader’s contemplation rather than being intended to be taken as absolute truths. Those who pick this book up and read it are therefore encouraged to consider whether these principles and practices feel true to life and, if they do, to try them out and see if they bring benefit. Do they help you to work more easily with your own array of addictions, both those of a coarse or a refined nature, and thereby free the heart from them? Do they lead you to a recognition of the balance of the Middle Way? Do they help you to find joy in the world, freeing the heart from the confines of envy and jealousy?

If so, that is to be delighted in. If, however, these words don’t help you, then may you discover other wholesome ways of finding true satisfaction and joy.