## 6 THE TWO KINDS OF DESIRE

It should not be presumed that every single kind of desire, or way of directing the mind towards an object or a goal, is intrinsically unwholesome. It’s specifically taṇhā that is the cause of dukkha. The best translation for taṇhā is ‘craving’, rather than ‘desire’; because you can’t really have a skilful craving. When the mind is in a state of craving, we’ve lost it, we haven’t got a quality of composure. There’s an agitated, unmindful, imbalanced and self-centred element within that.

The Pali word for desire with the broadest meaning is chanda. There are unskilful kinds of chanda, like kāmacchanda, sense desire, and there are skilful chanda, like Dhamma-chanda, desire for the Dhamma. This quality of chanda is a prerequisite for any kind of spiritual development, for any kind of effort that we make to be successful.

To achieve anything, whether it is wholesome, unwholesome or neutral, ‘the four bases of success’ need to be present. The first of these is chanda: interest, enthusiasm, zeal. It’s that attribute of mind which goes to an object and picks it up. The second quality is viriya, energy. After having aroused the interest to carry out some task, there needs to be the application of energy and effort to actually do something. The third one is citta, which in this respect means thinking, consideration. We need to think about what is it that we want to do, what’s the best way to go about it, what’s needed. The fourth one is vimaṃsā, which means reviewing, looking at the results of what we just did.

It’s very important to get to know the difference between taṇhā, the agitated, self-centred craving, and chanda, the capacity that we have to direct the mind towards a goal. What makes it confusing is that bhava-taṇhā and vibhava-taṇhā can latch on to extremely wholesome objects (for example, to become concentrated or enlightened, to get rid of lust, anger, laziness, etc.) so they can look very much like following the instructions of the Buddha. Taṇhā and chanda are like the left hand and the right hand: on one level they are exactly like each other but in another sense they are completly opposite. To be able to differentiate these two kinds of desire, we need to look at the attitude within the heart.

The key difference is that when there is bhava, ‘becoming’, when there is an attitude conducive to creating more alienation, suffering and difficulty, there’s always a self-centered element, sakkāya-diṭṭhi, this kind of narcissistic focus on ‘me’ and ‘mine’: ‘I want to get concentrated, I want to have insight... for the benefit of all beings, I need to get rid of my chattering mind and my anger’; or even, as the Buddha characterizes it in one teaching: ‘I am at peace, I have realized Nibbāna, I am without clinging’ (M 102.24). It’s all threaded through with ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’. On one level that might be true, maybe anger is a common feeling, maybe the mind has strong habits of chattering away, but the way that this is being held is that there is a ‘me’ here who possesses these issues, who needs to get rid of this stuff and get hold of that stuff and then there will be a ‘me’ who’s got everything together. So the self-view is pervading the attitude and, as long as it’s there, then the result is going to be painful. Luang Por Sumedho used to summarize this very simply: ‘If it begins with self-view, the result is dukkha, suffering. If it begins with Right View and wisdom, then the result is Nibbāna.’

When the desire is wholesome, in tune with reality, then we are practising the four qualities of Right Effort. The first one is saṃvara: restraining the unwholesome from arising. The second one is pahāna: letting go of the unwholesome which has already arisen. The third one is bhāvanā: consciously bringing the wholesome into being. The fourth one is anurakkhaṇa: protecting, cherishing, maintaining the wholesome qualities which have arisen. Right Effort is established and cultivated without any kind of self-view. It’s motivated and guided by mindfulness and wisdom.

We don’t have to be afraid to give the mind direction. When a choice is guided by mindfulness and wisdom, that will be conducive towards peacefulness and clarity, it’s not a disturbance. Peace is not passivity or an absence of activity. Rather, it comes from the attunement of the heart to Dhamma. We can make choices, we can do things, be engaged with people, look after our responsibilities, take initiative and not have that being felt as something disturbing. There’s a strong cultural conditioning of ‘if I’ve got to do something, it’s a bother’ and ‘when I don’t have to do anything, that’s great and then I can have peace.’ There is a societally sanctioned praising of switching off and not doing, not feeling, a zombie-like existence we call ‘peace’, a sort of nullified disengagement. If that’s our view of real peace, then anything that we have to do, or that is seen as activity or work, will be held as disturbing the peace. But if we shift the attitude and see that real peace comes from Right View, from letting go of self-centered thinking and attitudes, then we can experience the quality of spaciousness, clarity, and peacefulness in the midst of engagement. We’re not waiting for the absence of activity, stimulation or responsibility.

If we learn to make effort without all the I-making and mine- making (ahaṃkara and mamaṃkara in Pali), then life becomes a lot easier. We find ourselves unburdened and able to take care of the different aspects of what we need to do with a much lighter and more spacious attitude. We are not creating the emotional stress of always wanting success and fearing failure. Whatever the outcome of our actions, we learn from it without taking it personally and from there we take the next step forward. Judgements like ‘this is a failure’ or ‘this is a success’ are not reliable. We can see a success as something good, and then realize how sour and difficult that can turn; similarly something that’s bitter and painful, how helpful and beneficial that can turn out to be. When we allow that into the heart, then there’s a responsivity, a sense of freshness that we bring to each moment.

This shift also affects the way we relate to the success and failure of others; we can be warmed by the sunny glow of muditā for their success but we know that the sweetness of that event will not be the whole story. Similarly, when we feel the tender brightness of karuṇā, compassion, for another’s failure, that attitude will be grounded in the knowledge that such a loss can not be absolute.

When we reflect on anattā to explore the process of making a choice, we can see that there isn’t any self in there. It can seem that there is, when there’s attachment and identification, but when that’s let go of and there’s a clear and unbiased exploring of what’s experienced, then we see that what’s guiding our actions and choices is attunement to the present, mindfulness and wisdom. If this is the way the mind is guided then we do not claim success when things go well or claim failure when things go poorly. We’re able to live in a much more fluid and easeful way. We can let the way that we live and the way we respond to people and to situations be as natural and uncomplicated as the body breathing.

There will be for each of us specific kinds of situations where our attention gets most easily swept away, where the habits of identification are very strong, the deeply rooted compulsions of our minds. We can use meditation to help explore and understand the depth of that attachment, that identification, and train ourselves to let it go through using the mindfulness of the body. Instead of getting lost in the story or in the object of our emotion, we can bring attention to the body, notice and fully receive the related sensations and consciously relax. Even if the stories feeding those compulsions are complicated, the sensations of the body are very simple and when we fully accept these physical sensations, we also accept the related patterns of attachment within us. And that acceptance helps the mind in loosening its identification with them.