## 7 KNOWING EMOTIONS WITHIN THE BODY

When we get lost in the object of an emotion, whether it’s irritation or desire or fear or jealousy, then it’s very hard to establish any kind of clarity. The most helpful thing to do then, to get to know an emotion and to not get carried away by its compelling quality, is to develop mindfulness of the physical sensations that go along with it.

When we notice that the mind is getting pulled by some particular emotion or some kind of outflow (one of the āsavas), there is a physical element that we are able to perceive quite distinctly and the trick is to deliberately take the attention off the object that’s annoying or frightening or exciting and to bring it into the body and to explore: where do I feel that anger, where do I feel that jealousy, that desire? How does it sit in the body? What is its texture? Is it a tightness in the lungs? Is it a knot in the belly? Is it a sharp knife between the shoulder blades? Is it a constriction in the throat? Is it a vibration through the whole system? How is it? Where is it?

When we bring the attention to the physical sensations that occur with an emotion, then it’s a lot simpler because we’re not caught into the stories of what we should do or shouldn’t do, or how things should be... whatever the particular details of the circumstance are. Rather, there’s an almost monosyllabic language that the body speaks. It’s very simple, very direct, very uncomplicated. When we get caught up in the stories, in the emotionally charged tales, it gets very complicated very quickly. When we bring attention into the body and know the feeling that goes with any emotion, then we are able to acknowledge it, to accept it, to know it in a complete and unbiased way as a natural force. We’re able to not get entangled, not get so caught up in that emotion and then no longer take it so personally. We are able to discern: ‘Is it a wholesome emotion or an unwholesome emotion? Is it something that if it’s followed it’s going to lead to difficulty and harm or is it going to lead to benefit? Is it benign?’ We’re much more able to sustain a clarity around it.

If we have a strong tendency to go toward a particular emotion, whether it’s negativity, greed, jealousy, self-hatred, anger or whatever, we can deliberately explore that. For example, with anxiety: at every morning sitting, we can set a clear and conscious intention: ‘Today, whenever my mind moves towards anxiety, whether it’s coarse or fine, serious or trivial, I will make the effort to take the attention off the object of anxiety and bring it into the body, notice the feelings and consciously relax, using the out-breaths.’

We can also use the formal meditation to get to know this specific reactive pattern. We first let the mind be as quiet and spacious as possible and then we deliberately drop a memory or a thought or a person’s name that we’re particularly averse to or obsessed with in order to trigger that emotion. When the emotion is felt, we take the attention off the stories and we bring it into the body: ‘What does jealousy/anger/desire feel like? Where is it? What’s its texture?’

The most difficult element of this practice is to leave the story alone and to go directly to the physical quality of it. But if we do, then the more we receive it and accept it, the more we also accept, to some degree, the habits, the reactive patterns, the deeply rooted identifications that have caused that emotion in the first place. And to the degree to which we can accept it and receive it and know it just as it is, simply as an attribute of nature, then to that degree, we’re able to integrate it and to no longer be caught up and carried away by it.

So we allow it in, let it be known in the body, let it be sustained for a few minutes, and then consciously let it go, using the out- breaths to relax the body and to release that reactive pattern. It can take ten seconds to trigger the emotion and 45 minutes for it to fade, but it’s important to stay with it and to let it work through the system until it has faded away and the mind is relaxed and has returned to that spacious and open quality that you started from.

In that contemplative process there has been a receiving of the entire cycle: we’ve watched that feeling come into being, do its thing and then fade away. And in being attentive to that, we’ve also generated an attitude of acceptance for the whole cycle. So we were able to see that this feeling came out of nothing and went back into nothing. When we work with that in the safety and quietness of our meditation space, we are learning that skill in a very benign environment. Then, when that same emotion is triggered in a living situation, on a fundamental level we know what this is, we know this cycle, we know where this goes: ‘This is one of those patterns, I don’t have to be drawn into this, I don’t have to get obsessed or caught up or excited or intimidated by this.’

This is an extraordinary helpful skill to develop and employ, because in the flow of our daily lives there are emotions being triggered on a regular basis, as we all well know. We are all drawn into difficult situations and compulsive behaviours of one kind or another, and we can easily feel that we have no ability to get perspective on them.

This practice works equally effectively with more subtle emotions (less sharp-edged or distinct but in a way equally strong), like the feelings of doubt, or depression, or being stuck. It might not feel like it’s an emotion at all. It might feel more like a kind of deadness, dullness, a heavy, oppressive or depressive state. Sometimes we can not even name the emotion – we are trying to hold our world still because inside there’s a turbulent confusion of negative states – but it’s an emotion nonetheless.

That which knows ‘this feeling is like this’ is not caught in the feeling. Even if that feeling might still be there, it might be very powerful and convincing, at that moment we’re awakening the intuition that: ‘This is a feeling, this is something that has a beginning and an end. It’s not something that’s absolutely real and solid. It’s not completely who and what I am.’

If we develop this kind of practice and cultivate this way of handling emotional states, whether they’re coarse or subtle, whether they’re sharp-edged and active or whether they are inclining us towards depressive or heavy states, when we’re able to know them and receive them, then they’re realized to be patterns of a natural order. We are then far more able to take them less personally. Rather than thinking of them as ‘my problem’ or ‘this is what I am,’ there’s a shifting of perspective so that we’re able to see that this is just one of the things that we can experience as a human being. And in that shifting of perspective, the heart is more able to relate compassionately towards ourselves and what we’re experiencing and thereby much more compassionately to others too. When we have a compassionate attitude to the way things are, then at that very moment we are creating the causes for letting those habits end. We’re not feeding or recreating them. There is a freedom from the addiction – what a joy!