## 10 GUIDED MEDITATION

Begin the meditation in the same way as the previous Guided Meditation.

Allow the attention to settle on the feeling of the breath. Use that rhythm as a central point, a focus for attention. When the mind wanders, follow it back; come back to the central point, the simplicity of this present reality.

When you feel the mind is settled and there’s a quality of poise and some ease, deliberately bring to mind a desire, a fantasy with an emotional charge to it. It can be a desire to get or get rid of.

Unlike last time, for this exercise follow the string of thoughts and associations to see where the story ends up. Be imaginative:

‘… and once I’ve got the Double First Class degree at Oxford then ... And then ... And then ... And then ... And then ...?

‘ … once I’ve got those neighbours slammed with an ASBO … And then ... And then ... And then ...?

‘… and once we’re married … then she ... And then ... And then

... And then ...?

‘ … once I’ve become a nun … And then ... And then ... And then

... And then ...?

‘ … once I’ve got out of the monastery … And then we ... And then ... And then ... And then ...?

‘… and then after that he will … And then we ... And then ... And then ... And then ... And then ...?

‘ … that’s my favourite! If they could cook it here just like at that restaurant in Bali, then … And then ... And then ... And then

... And then ... And then ...?

This is an investigation into ‘gratification, enjoyment’ (assāda) and ‘liability, the downside’ (ādīnava). You find, through following through any string of associations from a desire, through such deliberate conceptual proliferation, you see where it goes.

When we mindfully walk through the likely results having got what we wanted, what do we find…?

‘Do we really want that?’/ ‘Oh yes of course, then I’d have to find a job’/‘and you get the family with her’/‘and if I ate that every day...’ See where it goes. See for yourself; with the sweetness of assāda... comes the bitterness of ādīnava.

Or maybe not … look for yourself.

Once you reach that cool, sober quality of ādīnava, what do you do? Stay with it. Let that cool dispassionate quality then feed the inclination to let go – this is ‘release’ (nissaraṇa).

Stay with that simple recognition of freedom. Feel its tone, its beauty, its spaciousness, its brightness.

Go back to the breath. Re-establish attention in the present.