## 1 THE CYCLES OF ADDICTION

When the mind gets caught in the feeling of pleasure, there is the tendency to want more of it. Or, when the mind experiences an unpleasant, painful feeling, it wants to get away from it. This is what is called the bridge between ‘feeling’ and ‘craving’. This is the key point in the addictive process because this is where the trouble really starts: where the feeling of ‘like’ transforms into ‘I want’ and the feeling of ‘dislike’ turns into ‘I can’t stand’ or ‘I can’t bear it.’

When the mind grasps at the feeling of like or dislike and follows that craving, the attention very quickly gets drawn into that and the universe shrinks to the single desired object that we’re craving for. All the rest of the world gets screened out. We are taking hold of that object and investing our sense of hope, ownership, our sense of identity in it; this is the case regardless of whether it is a sense-object – what we see, hear, smell, touch or taste – or something more subtle like a mind-state or a memory. In that absorption, we are creating a commitment to that, an identification with that. That becomes the most important thing for us. This is bhava, becoming, which leads to jati, birth, a full absorption into the thing that we’re chasing after or resenting.

That commitment, that full absorption, then naturally leads to the experience of alienation, of insecurity, incompleteness; there is disappointment that that desired object was pleasant for a moment but then after a while it ceased to satisfy us: in short, there is dukkha.

That experience of dukkha, in turn, supports and conditions a cyclical process, because if the mind absorbs into that feeling of regret, disappointment, even self-hatred, if that’s not seen clearly, if we’re not fully cognizing how the whole picture is, then that feeds avijjā – the quality of ignorance. It makes us less mindful, we see less clearly and so that then creates a set of conditions whereby we’re more easily pulled into the next wave of that which is attractive, that which is irritating, that which we are habituated to. We thus find ourselves repeating the same habits, getting lost in the same patterns over and over again.

This is how we use the word ‘ignorance’ in Buddhist psychology. It doesn’t mean lacking the pertinent facts about some issue, a want of knowledge, as it does in regular English usage; instead it means ‘unawareness’, ‘unmindfulness’, ‘nescience’ or ‘not seeing things clearly’.

In that process, the moment of maximum thrill is when we’re chasing after a desired object, when we know we’re going to get it, but we haven’t got it quite yet. This is what we call ‘becoming’ – bhava. This is very useful to understand because, surprisingly, what we get addicted to is not getting what we want but it’s that moment when we know for sure that we are going to get it. As it says in ‘The House at Pooh Corner’ by AA Milne:

‘What do you like doing best in the world, Pooh?’

‘Well,’ said Pooh, ‘what I like best –’ and then he had to stop and think. Because although Eating Honey was a very good thing to do, there was a moment just before you began to eat it which was better than when you were, but he didn’t know what it was called.

We absorb into that promise, in that becoming. But as soon as we get what we want, we’re already disappointed. The thrill is in that promise.

When we’ve acquired what we’ve wanted, or we’ve had a good rant at the things we were annoyed at, we then experience that ache of incompleteness, disappointment for the fading thrill or self-criticism for having got lost in that unsatisfying process again. At that point something in the mind begins hunting for something to help us get away from that lonely, incomplete, fragmented, unsatisfied feeling and it remembers the last time that we felt good; so… where does it go? At a cellular level it is reminded of that previous gratification so it inclines toward repeating that moment of becoming – the promise of feeling that again. So the mind is tricked and conditioned by the effect of the last time we felt good and it’s drawn back to repeat that same pattern.

This is how the process configures itself, irrespective of whether the object of desire is a more expensive Rolex watch than the other person, a new boyfriend, a place in a retirement home, reaching fourth jhāna and getting to be the most impressive meditator, a pipe of crack or getting your paper on ‘The Nature of the Tathāgata’ published – the map the Buddha provided applies to every self-centered desire. And the same is true for all those negative desires too: wanting to get away from your awful neighbours; wanting to get rid of anger and jealousy; vowing with gritted teeth never to be born again… if it’s coming from the place of self-view, the result will be dukkha and more turns on the sorry-go-round.

Part of our mind is saying ‘This is ridiculous, it didn’t work last time either, so why am I doing this again!?’ but it’s not a rational process. In order to learn how the rebirth pattern works we have to get familiar with the non-rational aspects of our being, the instinctual attractions and aversions and compulsions that come from the reptile brain: feelings of craving, aversion, fear, feelings about territory, etc. It’s important to use our meditation to explore and understand that instinctual and reactive, non-conceptual area of our being; we need to see into its mechanisms, its workings and then through that seeing, to help set the heart free from that.