## 9 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question: Semantically, ‘staying’ with a feeling and ‘clinging to’ a feeling appear to be the same thing. But I wonder if you would inform us about the differentiation between the two and how we deal with that.

Answer: That’s a good question. One of the most often quoted explanations involves a big rock outside the ordination hall at Wat Pah Pong. Once someone asked Luang Por Chah about clinging and holding on, and he said:

‘See that rock?’

‘Yes.’

‘Is that rock heavy?’

‘Yes. It’s a huge rock. Of course it’s heavy.’

‘Not if you don’t try to pick it up.’

You can stand right next to the rock, you can sit on top of the rock, you can be wholly with it; but unless you try to pick it up it’s not heavy. If the quality of awareness is really refined, there can be a knowing: ‘This is an intense craving. I feel like I absolutely have to follow it,’ or ‘This is rage. I feel aversion and destructive anger,’ but without becoming caught up in the emotion. The same applies to somebody else’s intense feeling; it’s a big emotion, but we’re not sharing it.

Easy to say, difficult to do.

Question: How does sympathetic joy relate to expressing enthusiasm for somebody’s enthusiasm? From time time I get invited to share someone’s enthusiasm for some special thing even though I’m really not interested in it. It’s awkward. But how does sympathetic joy relate to this?

Answer: With mindfulness. It’s like when a little two-year-old comes rushing up to you with a picture they’ve drawn; and they say: ‘Look what I drawd!’ You accept their enthusiasm and excitement, but you yourself are not excited. You don’t have to be hypocritical; you can be joyful simply for their joy. They might have thought they’d drawn a beautiful horse. You don’t really see the horse there and it wasn’t your drawing. You can certainly empathize with their feeling, but you’re not excited in the same way. Also, with the brahma-vihāras it’s often not a matter of choosing. It’s not a theoretical choice: three units of muditā and one and a half of karuṇā, and a handful of mettā tossed in. It’s much more of an intuitive process. So sometimes when someone is excited or enthusiastic, it can feel appropriate to express the muditā that may arise. But another time you may appreciate that they’re excited and you’re happy for them, but it doesn’t form into any kind of expression. It’s important to be true to your own feeling, and that can only really come from mindfulness. If you think: ‘I should always be happy with other people’s happiness, and I should always express it like this,’ that can make life very uncomfortable and complicated. It’s more a matter of drawing upon the quality of a mindful attunement to the moment.

It may be appropriate to speak up and express approval, or disapproval, and say what you’re feeling. When someone’s really angry with you or upset about something, sometimes the most helpful thing can be to say: ‘You’re really upset, aren’t you?’ Not from a patronizing point of view, but showing that though you’re not upset yourself, you recognize that they’re really angry and you care about that.

Another significant element of this area concerns that gnarly subject of ‘the right thing’ – while at one moment a comment might be absolutely the perfect thing to say, a moment later it might come across as the most condescending and irritating remark. We have to learn to attune to what’s appropriate in the moment. One moment the right thing to do may just be to be quiet and still, and not to try and fix things. The next moment it might be to say: ‘Well this is a tense moment, isn’t it!’ And that might transform the moment in a beautiful way, though if you’d said it two seconds earlier, you’d just have created more tension.

A lot of this is to do with a development of genuine mindfulness and a readiness to let go of our own programme. Often we’re ‘preoccupied’. That’s a very good word for it. We’re ‘occupied’ already. We’re not empty; we’re occupied, so that when we meet a situation we’ve already got an agenda for handling it. Instead we need to let ourselves be more empty. When we encounter someone’s grief, sometimes the most difficult thing to do is just to be with it. We need to be empty so as to receive that person’s sadness, rather than filling up the space with our own pre-conditioned clever ideas or our own agenda.

When Ram Dass’s stepmother was close to death he was by her bedside, giving her lengthy guidance to follow her breath and then, if the inner light arose, to let go and open herself to the light, and suchlike. He went on like this for an hour or so. Finally, he paused for breath, and she turned towards him from her bed and said: ‘Ram Dass, be quiet.’ As he said himself, he was not comfortable with that space, so he was filling it up with his own programme of ‘I’m the death and dying expert, and I should teach my stepmother how to die.’ Then he realized: ‘Oh, she’s got something to teach me.’

Question: What about the feeling of loneliness when you’re guarded – because I think that mindfulness has a certain element of being on guard in order not to be sucked into something – or the fear of loneliness that comes from not having that empathetic connection? Another one I have trouble with is feeling I should have muditā for someone when what I really feel is: ‘But I want one too!’ Can you speak about some other kinds of empathy that might address the loneliness, or some other kind of practice that addresses these issues?

Answer: There are a few different things involved in your question but I’d say the response is the same to all of them. Even with feelings like loneliness, and jealousy what I would suggest is finding it in your body. Where is that lonely feeling? And we can make friends with it? Loneliness is an uncomfortable feeling, an ache in the heart, but we can bring the quality of attention, openness, to that ache of loneliness as well.

The big mistake we often make is to feel we have to climb over this negative feeling (jealousy, loneliness, fear) to get to that good place on the other side (sympathetic joy, wholeness, security). The irony is that by opening the heart to the felt presence of those very ‘negatives’ we are acting based on a full acceptance of the way things are, which creates the causes for the realization of all those ‘positives’.

Mindfulness is a single word, but it can mean a lot of different things to different people. So being on guard and thinking:‘I’ve not to let my mind escape to any of these little outlets, these escape hatches. I’ve got to keep track, otherwise it’s going to run away’ is a fearful relationship to mindfulness. If you recognize and know in the body the texture of that fearful attitude, that awareness should spur a natural relaxation. Then you can let the mindfulness be more a quality of total acceptance – loving everything.