## 5 WHAT CAUSES THE ADDICTIVE CYCLE?

The addictive process is connected to what we do when we meet with dukkha. It’s mysterious how this works. When we have followed through on a desire (whether it’s a sense object, having a good rant, seeking approval or affection, being a successful meditator or whatever), then we experience this painful, difficult quality of dukkha: unhappiness, regret, feelings of incompleteness, criticism. Then the rational mind may think:

‘Why would you want to do that again?’ When we arrive at that experience of dukkha we might even be feeling: ‘This is awful; this is pointless; this is really harmful: physically, emotionally, socially; this is why I said I wasn’t going to do this again; I hate this; I need to get free of this; I’d never want to do this to myself ever again.’ This is the rational mind, the voice of reason and clarity speaking. So how is it that we find ourselves pursuing the same pattern of desire, often just a short while later?

It seems to work this way because we’re not clear about the experience of dukkha. It’s painful. We feel rattled, we’re unsettled, we’re adrift, we’re lonely, we’re insecure, a wounded fragment. There’s a lot of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ in that which is not being seen clearly.

The voice of reason is not the voice that has the power in all situations. This voice of reason, the voice of wisdom, is the voice of the neo-cortex, the super-ego, the clear rational thinker. But what’s driving the force of craving and compulsion is the non-conceptual, reactive reptile brain, the limbic system: ‘Me. I want. Get out of here. That’s mine’; it’s that non-verbal, hormonal, reactive impulse towards sexual gratification, towards ownership of property, fear of threats towards us, aggression, competition, or getting revenge on those who’ve hurt us. That instinctual aspect of our being is what’s driving the wheel of becoming and that’s what causes the same patterns to repeat themselves. The thinking mind might be brought in to provide some kind of back-up, to justify our actions, but the impulse, the driving force of it is more this non-conceptual, reactive element of our nature.

The reason we get drawn into repeating the same patterns over and over again is because we’re in that state of dukkha. We’re feeling insecure, lonely, incomplete, there is a sense of ‘I’ that is not satisfied, it’s looking for something to make it feel good, secure, happy, protected, complete and in that mix of wanting to ‘make me feel good’ the mind inclines towards ‘what is the thing that made me feel good last time?’ And when we last felt that feeling of gratification was when we had that last drink, or pastry, or rant... And so, against all reason, the attention moves towards recreating that situation, to get that feeling of gratification once again. It finds a way through.

We are drawn back to not just our loves and hates but also to that which is familiar to us, because they are the ruts that we follow, the things that the mind is conditioned to, whether they are wholesome, unwholesome or neutral. Such ruts can be something that is directly destructive or it could be more subtle: the habituation to being a woman, of being French, our affiliation of being a Theravada Buddhist, our identification with our social roles, our position in society. As the Buddha put it:

Whatever one frequently thinks and ponders upon, that will become the inclination of one’s mind.

Dvedhāvitakka Sutta (‘Two Kinds of Thought’) M 19.6

Even if the things that the mind is habituated to are powerful and long-lasting, it’s important to recognize that we have the capacity to free the heart from them, no matter how strong or deeply rooted they might be, because these habituations, these identities, these addictions are not who and what we are. It’s important to see that the teachings on anicca, dukkha, anattā are ways of exploring that and see for ourselves whether that’s true. When we develop the insight into anattā then we’re awakening that realization, that clear seeing within the heart that knows that there is no thing that can truly and realistically be who and what we are.

Experience tells us all that we can’t make a habit go away just by hearing that ‘Everything is not-self.’ That’s just the thinking, rational mind that is seeing that. Rather it takes a moment-by-moment application of genuine mindfulness and wisdom, a training of the mind to look directly and clearly at the experience over and over again, awakening that insight that this addiction is not who and what we are, but simply a powerful impulse, a powerful habit of identification. We don’t try to make ourselves believe that solely by hanging on to a hope but instead by vitalizing and strengthening clear understanding, direct seeing. We can choose to let that insight have its voice rather than believing the habitual judgments of the mind that say, ‘I’m a hopeless victim. There’s no way I can get out of this.’ As human beings, we are never a victim. We have tremendous resources, we have capacities, we can make choices. But part of us enjoys being carried along, even enjoys being a victim.

Until we really know the pain of attachment, we won’t let go. Reason won’t cause us to let go. Good advice from our friends won’t cause us to let go.

The Buddha said that suffering ripens in one of two ways: either in further suffering or it ripens in search: ‘There must be a way out of this’ (A 6.63). Furthermore, when that dukkha is being reflected upon in this way, it can give rise to faith – the faith and confidence that there’s got to be an alternative, that the heart can be freed from this. In a discourse called ‘The Proximate Cause,’ also known as ‘Transcendental Dependent Origination’ (S 12.23) the Buddha asks, ‘And what is the proximate cause for faith? It should be said: suffering.’ He then goes on to describe how that faith then gives rise to gladness, rapture, tranquillity, contentment, concentration, insight into the way things are, and ultimately to liberation.

Just as, when rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountain top, the water flows down along the slopes and fills the clefts, gullies and creeks; these being full, fill up the pools; these being full, fill up the lakes; these being full, fill up the streams; these being full, fill up the rivers; and these being full, fill up the great ocean; so too, with ignorance as proximate cause, formations come to be; with formations as proximate cause … suffering … faith … gladness … contentment … concentration … insight into the way things are … with liberation as proximate cause, the knowledge of transcendence.

When we are feeling that restless, distressed, lonely, incom- plete feeling, rather than seeking to get away from that or fill up that space with something that’s pleasing, instead, the encouragement is to let it in, to let the results of that action, of that attitude be fully known. That opening to the painfulness of it is found to be what helps the habit to be broken, what helps the causes of the habits to dissolve and what strengthens the wisdom faculty – that clarity of mind that intuits ‘I don’t have to be caught up in this.’

Habits are hard to break. Maybe we are able to see: ‘Yes, this is destructive, this is painful. Yes, there is a way out of it. Yes, I can see that this is possible’ but yet there is a lot of momentum there. It might also be that we don’t recognize how these patterns work. But what we can do is to substitute a more harmless or wholesome obsession for a more destructive one. This is not a sign of weakness but it’s more a pragmatic way to gradually free the heart from any kind of compulsiveness. With this less harmful substitute we are able to find a sense of contentment. Just giving ourselves the space to leave aside the usual obsession and to substitute it with something much more benign, we can learn and notice, ‘Oh, look! Actually, this is fine. I’m quite content with this instead. I didn’t really need that other stuff. Nothing is missing.’ We can find ways of creating some kind of diversion so that we’re still giving the impulsive craving something to chew on but we’re making our ‘chews’ less and less harmful. The Buddha, in making a similar point about subsituting an unwholesome object with one that was more wholesome, compared it to: ‘A carpenter knocking out a large peg with a small peg’ (M20.3); and, in the same sutta:

Just as a man walking fast might consider, ‘Why am I walking fast? What if I walk slowly?’ … then , ‘Why am I walking slowly? What if I stand?’ … ‘Why am I standing? What if I sit?’ … ‘Why am I sitting? What if I lie down?’ … By doing so he would substitute for each grosser posture one that was subtler.

Vitakkasaṇṭhāna Sutta (‘The Removal of Distracting Thoughts’) M20.6

Friends of ours in Alcoholics Anonymous tell me that they drink a considerable amount of coffee and often smoke a lot; caffeine and nicotine are acknowledged as harmful indeed but they don’t have the massively destructive behavioural effects that alcohol brings with it.

And then there’s a story I heard Peter Cook once tell about his time at Cambridge. When Lenny Bruce was invited to England by Peter Cook, on behalf of the Cambridge University Footlights Revue, on arrival his hosts, eager to please, asked if there was anything they could provide him with to make his stay more comfortable. To Peter Cook’s horror, he casually replied, ‘Some heroin would be nice.’ After a desperate scramble through a very limited range of possibilities, a while later Peter Cook apologetically told him, ‘Sorry, Mr Bruce, we tried very hard but…’. ‘Never mind,’ his guest laconically reassured him, ‘just some chocolate cake will be fine.’

It’s a neat story but in telling it I don’t wish to trivialize such addictions; it is fully acknowledged that sometimes such substitutions are easy while at other times they are very difficult.