## 11 NON-ARISING

Saṁsāra means ‘endless wandering,’ going around and around, repeating the same patterns; it’s the cycle of birth and death, the cycle of addictions. The philosopher George Santayana famously said, ‘Those who do not learn from the past are condemned to repeat it.’

The experience of dukkha itself can be an exit point from the cycle of addiction. As mentioned (above, p 39), when we experience dukkha it can ripen in two ways. One is in further dukkha: when we experience dissatisfaction, discontent, loneliness, alienation, it simply makes us hungry for another hit of our drug of choice (whether it’s nicotine, praise, truffles or jhānas) to take us away from the discomfort. Or, if there is sufficient pāramitā, wisdom and world-weariness (saṃvega in Pali), it awakens the question: ‘What’s the way out of this? I’ve been repeating this pattern for so long, what’s the way out? There must be a way out.’ The experience of dukkha then awakens faith rather than conditioning more ignorance and more rebirths. This is known as ‘Transcendent Dependent Arising’. Then faith leads to the quality of delight, leading to physical and mental ease and contentment, leading to samādhi, and to insight and to liberation. As we have seen, the most accessible exit point from the addictive cycle is the link between feeling and craving. Another exit point, is to not start the cycle at all. Nirodha can mean ‘cessation’, that is to say the ending of a thing that has begun, but it can also mean ‘checking’, ‘restraining’ or ‘non-arising’. So with the non-arising of ignorance (i.e. when there is knowing, awakened awareness), then saṅkhāra does not arise, and so forth…

Moment by moment we are not experiencing an objective world; rather we’re experiencing our mind’s representation of the world. What is the world? The Buddha answered: ‘The eye is the world, the ear is the world, the nose is the world, the tongue is the world, the body is the world, the mind is the world’ (S 35.116). It’s not saying that the whole world is just a dream but it’s saying that our version, our experience of the world (therefore the only ‘world’ we can know) is conjured into being through the activity of our senses and our human minds. Thus, when we talk about nirodha, the cessation of things, when there is no ignorance, what is ceasing is the substantiality of division between a subject and an object. The feeling arising from sense- contact happens in the mind. That can be experienced without the view of a subject/object division.

It has a radical effect on our attitude, when we shift our perspective and recollect that the whole world is happening in the mind. That gives a broader context to experience and imbues it with a quality of non-entanglement. The heart can’t get so wrapped-up in every experience, in likes and dislikes, when we’re recognizing: ‘It’s merely hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, touching. That’s what’s happening here.’ As the Buddha says in his teaching to Bāhiya:

In the seen, there is only the seen, in the heard, there is only the heard, in the sensed only the sensed, in the cognized only the cognized.

Since, Bāhiya, there is for you in the seen, only the seen, in the heard, only the heard, in the sensed only the sensed, in the cognized only the cognized, and you see that there is no thing here, you will therefore see that indeed there is no thing there.

And as you see that there is no thing there, you will see that you therefore can not be located either in the world of this, or in the world of that, nor in any place between the two. This alone is the end of suffering.

Bāhiya Sutta, Ud 1.10

This is an exit point from the cycle because if we’re able to establish the heart in vijjā, in awakened awareness, then the whole pattern does not take off, we’re not imbuing the felt sense of this moment with the ‘me’ here and ‘the world’ out there. When we see something that we like, we know, ‘This is seeing; this is liking’; and when we see something that we dislike, ‘This is disliking.’ There is a knowing that this is part of a flow of perception, and that’s all. It can’t have an owner, it’s just patterns of nature arising and ceasing, doing their thing.

In that clarity, that non-entanglement, there’s a supremely easeful participation, a profound attunement and a harmony with life and its present conditions; rather than the kind of dissociated numbness in relation to the world that can come from wrongly grasping the principle of ‘watching the mind’ or trying to ‘be an unattached observer’. In a mysterious way, when there’s is a complete letting go of the world, its partner is a simultaneous attunement to the world.To sustain the quality of vijjā, of awakened awareness is, however, a more demanding exit point. It’s not easy to do because the habits of attachment and entanglement are very profound, but it certainly is doable.

With practice, we see more and more clearly the blessings that come from establishing that quality of awareness, that ‘unentangled knowing’, and how we can restrain the compulsions and the habitual attachments from arising. The more fully and firmly that quality of awareness is established, then the easier it is to not get into trouble, to not create the situations where we are causing confusion and difficulty for ourselves and consequently for the people around us. This is ‘Dependent Cessation’, a process which describes in detail the journey from Noble Truth #1 (the experience of dukkha) to Noble Truth #3 (the cessation or checking of dukkha).

We can bring our attention to this task; in this moment, to watch dukkha as it arises, to watch dukkha as it ceases and to know how that works. If we give attention to that and if that’s understood, if that’s developed as a skill, then all the rest is extra. Using the analogy of playing in an orchestra: simply to be able to know how to play our instrument, to know the piece of music, to be able to discern if we’re going too fast or too slow or if we’re too sharp or too flat and to know when things are in harmony – that’s all we need to know. If we pay attention to that particular task, then we learn how to do it well. Our attention isn’t getting scattered over unnecessary things. We find we are able to play harmoniously and we realize that this was everything that was needed.

The teaching of Dependent Origination maps out the arising of dukkha, how that disharmony appears, how we get out of tune with the rest of the orchestra and then how we can harmonize. In a sense this is all we really need to know: how to play in tune, how to bring our life into harmony with the world around us, with our own physical being, with our own past conditioning, the people that we live with and with the world around us.

That’s all we need to do – this is the ‘handful of leaves’ that the Buddha referred to as all we really need to know (S 56.31). There are infinite numbers of other things that can be known – those are all the other leaves in the forest – but what is of central importance is this capacity we have to be in balance with nature and to free the heart from all its restrictive dependencies. This quintessential balancing comes about through training the heart not to cling – and the blessings of this transformation are the highest. As the Buddha put it when he spoke to Sakka:

When a person has heard that ‘nothing whatsoever should be clung to,’ they directly know everything; having directly known everything, they fully understand everything; having fully understood everything, whatever feeling they feel … they abide contemplating impermanence, fading, cessation and the relinquishment of those feelings.Contemplating thus, they do not cling to anything in the world. When they do not cling, they are not agitated. When they are not agitated, they personally attain Nibbāna.

Cūḷataṇhāsankhaya Sutta (‘The Shorter Discourse on the Destruction of Craving’) M 37.3

Lastly, if we bring this attunement to every dimension of our experience, it’s not just a blessing to us; it becomes a blessing to everybody that we share this life with. The heart established in vijjā naturally responds to all situations via the four brahma- vihāras. Freed from the confines of self-centred desires, mettā, karuṇā, muditā and upekkhā all arise on their own, in response to the needs of each moment.