## 2 DESIRE IS A LIAR

When the mind says: ‘I must have…’ or ‘She’s got one, I need one of those too’ or: ‘I’ve got to have a better one than him,’ we shouldn’t consider that it’s telling the truth. It’s an impulse that the mind is coming up with, certainly, but we don’t have to go along with it. If we learn to watch that impulse and recognize that it’s a lie, we will not get caught in it; then we won’t create the feeling of disappointment or lack, and we will find that we are much more content and happy with the way things are. Even if we don’t get what we want, we will realize that nothing is missing.

We can learn to use the structures and the limits of a retreat, a monastic life or those that are part of lay life, as a good opportunity to explore these themes, to look at the mind’s habit of chasing after a desire or an aversion. We can make an effort to not follow the craving but to know: ‘This is a feeling; this is a very potent feeling perhaps, it’s very strong, but it is just a feeling.’ The mind might make a strong case: ‘I can’t stand this! ‘I’ve got to get away from...’ or ‘I’ve got to have some!’ but we can learn to know that as a movement, a wave, a feeling in the heart and to know that that craving, that desire, is a lie. It’s not the truth, it’s not the whole story; it’s merely a mental impulse.

When we are able to recognize that: ‘This is a feeling of liking and the mind is trying to run away with it’ or: ‘This is a feeling of disliking and the mind is trying to run away with it,’ at that very moment we’re looking at the bridge between feeling and craving. That is the most helpful place to bring our attention. We are coming to the bridge and choosing not to cross it. We can recognize that: ‘Yes, this is a strong feeling; this is very compelling but I don’t have to cross this bridge.’ That’s a tremendous power we have, the freedom to make that choice. And essentially this is how we can liberate ourselves from the cycles of rebirth, the cycles of addiction. We can train our minds to recognize that we have a choice to not cross that bridge, to not let the mind get absorbed into craving, clinging and becoming and then to experience directly the freedom and peacefulness, the joyfulness that comes from living unselfishly.