## 4 CRAVING UPSETS THE BALANCE

This dynamic is what brings us into a state of conflict with the reality of life. When we buy into ‘I want more, just one more; I want to keep this, this is really great,’ then at that moment we believe the promise that ‘If I had just one more, then I would be happy.’ We’re feeling we’re incomplete but if we get one more drink or one more piece of cake or one more profound meditation experience, then we’re going to be happy and satisfied. Whether the object of addiction is coarse or subtle, wholesome or unwholesome, it works in exactly the same way. We are pulled by that ‘just one more’ promise.

A good image to describe the process is that of getting on a train. From avijjā up to vedanā, that’s like arriving at the station and getting on to the train. The train isn’t moving yet. So when we’re at the realm of feeling we can taste the pleasantness of getting the meditation experience that we wanted, being praised or suchlike. Once the change has gone from ‘I like’ to ‘I want’ (taṇhā), then the train is starting to move. As we know, trains tend to pick up speed fairly rapidly. Craving conditions clinging, clinging conditions becoming, becoming conditions birth. We can imagine that, as the train steadily increases speed, if the train has only just started to move, we could still jump off without causing ourselves too much harm. When we recognize the ‘I want’ or the ‘Just one more’ feeling, then we can get off at this point without too much difficulty. But once it’s moved into ‘clinging’ and the mind is committing itself into ‘Yes, I’m going to pursue it!’ then the train is picking up speed so it’s going to be a pretty uncomfortable if we get off at this point. By the time we’ve got to ‘becoming,’ we’re pretty much out of the station and it’s going to be a nasty tumble when we land. Once the becoming has changed to birth, that’s the point of no return. Then the situation has to be followed through and lived to its completion. After ‘birth’ has happened the thrill has already passed and there are the implications of having followed that impulse, the dukkha that follows: self-criticism, disappointment and every kind of grief. That moment of thrill is no longer filling the universe. Starting from craving, the mind is narrowing and narrowing until the point of ‘becoming,’ the chief moment of thrill. Once we’ve already got what we wanted, then the universe starts to get bigger again and we realize that there are other things that come with it – the bill, the responsibility, the jealousy of others who did not get the prize, the painful realization that our heart has shrunk to be ‘two sizes too small’. It’s a rude awakening at that point. I realize modern-day trains are harder to jump off but I’m sure you get the point.

The more we’re able to recognize that once the mind has followed such an impulse it gets harder and harder to let go, the more that encourages us to pay very close attention to the issue of getting on the train – that is to say, how the realm of feeling works and how feeling transforms into craving. As we’re developing a consistent, comprehensive mindfulness around feeling, we are training ourselves not to believe those promises, not to believe that ‘Because it’s a pleasant feeling, then more of it would be better’ or ‘If this is followed, then I would be happy.’ There is the capacity to know ‘this is a pleasant feeling,’ ‘here is the sound of a promise.’ We don’t have to hate the train; we don’t have to fear it. We recognize that we have the power, the capacity to know that it’s there and to not climb on board. The more that we’re able to bring attention and clarity to the feeling of liking, the feeling of disliking, and to know them simply as that, as natural mental processes, mental formations, then we find a freedom in our lives that is never present if we have habituated ourselves to chase after what is pleasant and to push away what is unpleasant. We’re learning to respond and to relate to the realm of feeling with a different attitude. In that change of attitude, we find tremendous freedom, a rich quality of peacefulness. The heart is no longer just reacting and we’re able to respond to life: if something is useful and appropriate then we can do that; if we recognize it as being harmful and obstructive, we can leave it alone.

One of the natural outcomes of this increased freedom is the shift in attitude towards others. If the mind was once inclined towards resentment of the success of others, and the driving force of many of our desires was from seeing what they had and wanting the same, now the mind is more able to appreciate and consciously enjoy the happiness of others. We might not think of ourselves as particularly envious or jealous, nevertheless it is rare to be glad when the other person gets the green light and we have to wait; that someone else gets the parking space while we have to keep hunting for one; that someone else got the spot on the retreat with Luang Por Sumedho while you are #114 on the waiting list…

Muditā – altruistic, appreciative joy, gladness at the good fortune of others – is a rare and precious quality. It is the very antithesis of taṇhā – the desire to get something for me – and the curmudgeonly attitudes of the jaded cynic. When feelings of like or dislike are fully understood and not followed blindly, the heart is free to expand in the blossoming of muditā, as well as the other brahma-vihāras. It is discovered that there are causes for joy all around us. Why should we not delight in a dog wrestling a stick, in an athlete triumphing over all obstacles, in someone else having the most impressive meditation posture?

A number of years ago, when I lived in America, I met the Rev. James Jelinek; he was the minister of the church we used to rent for our gatherings in San Francisco. He offered me lunch one day and during this he told me a story about how he’d recently applied to become the Bishop of Carmel. He had made it into the group of the last three candidates but then was not chosen. He told me how he went away from that experience somewhat resentful and upset, grumbling and full of reasonable indignations. He clearly never spared a thought for the minister who got the promotion and the job. And then… to his surprise, I think it was about six weeks later, he said he woke up one morning and realized: ‘I was not really ready for that post. The best person for the role was actually the one they gave the job to.’ He was surprised at how clear it was to him. His envy and resentment fell away and he realized he was feeling glad for the people of Carmel. They got the best one. Incidentally, a PS to this story is that, three years later, he became the Bishop of Minnesota.

There are reasons to be glad and grateful all around us, if we would only look.