## 2 ‘IS THIS PRINCIPLE OF “KARMIC FATE” WHAT THE BUDDHA TAUGHT?’

If you look at the Buddha’s teachings, you’ll see that he spent a lot of time and energy trying to counteract the view that our lives are pre-determined by past karma; that what happens in our lives is fixed and unavoidable. It was a common view during his era, as now. For example, when Ānanda was explaining this principle to the wanderer Sandaka:

Suppose, Sandaka, a certain teacher claims to be omniscient, constantly and continually, while walking, standing, lying or awake. He enters an empty house and is not offered any food. A dog bites him. He encounters an elephant in rut, a wild horse or an angry bull. … When asked why [he did not foresee or do something to avoid such difficulties]. He replies, ‘I had to enter an empty house, that is why I entered it; I had to get no alms-food … I had to be bitten by a dog ...’

Sandaka Sutta, M 76.21

And, earlier on in the same sutta, when describing another brand of wrong view:

Suppose, Sandaka, a certain teacher upholds the view: ‘All beings … are without mastery, power and energy; they are moulded by destiny, circumstance and nature; made impure or purified for no apparent cause or reason.’

(M 76.13)

Over and over again in his dialogues with fellow wanderers, yogis and spiritual teachers of other schools (for example, in the Devadaha Sutta, M 101), he points out that if karma was fixed, if our actions in the present time could have absolutely no effect, then liberation would be impossible. If the flow of our life was pre-ordained it would not matter whether we did good or harm. But common sense shows that the actions we take in this life continually have a variety of effects, and we seem able to have freedom of choice. Of course, some people say: ‘But it only looks as though we have freedom of choice.’ They think that freedom is an illusion, and that the choice and its result were actually already fixed in stone beforehand. This is easy enough to believe and widely held, but the Buddha repeatedly and patiently pointed out that it is not the case. As he said when a wanderer called Moḷiya Sīvaka asked him:

‘Master Gotama, there are some religious people whose view is: “Whatever a person experiences, whether pleasant painful or neutral, all that was caused by what was done in the past,” what do you say about this issue?’

‘Some feelings, Sīvaka, originate from bile … phlegm … or wind disorders … or an imbalance of the three; that … one can know for oneself and that is considered to be true in the world.

‘Some feelings, Sīvaka, are produced by a change of climate … by careless behaviour … are caused by assault … or are produced as a result of kamma; that ... one can know for oneself and that is considered to be true in the world.

Therefore, when such people assert the view that: “Whatever a person experiences … was caused by what was done in the past,” they overreach what one knows by oneself and they overreach what is considered to be true in the world. Therefore I say that this is wrong on the part of those people.’

(S 36.21; also compare A 3.61)

Certainly, what we experience in the present moment is pre- conditioned. What we experience here and now is the result of everything that has happened in the universe since at least the Big Bang. So, having a human body and mind, picking up this book, reading these Dhamma reflections in English and being able to understand it, having the faculties of cognition and thought, memory and understanding – all these together are the results of everything that has gone before. Our life is pre-conditioned. But, according to the Buddhist understanding of things, what words I choose to say and your reactions to them are up to us as we are now. The world is definitely pre- conditioned but what we do with it here in the present moment is entirely up to us. Choices can be made, and those choices make a difference. That’s why karma, actions, our efforts, make a difference. That’s how orientation is given to our life, and how we are able to steer our actions, our lives and our understanding towards that which is wholesome, that which is liberating. It is not a fixed deterministic universe.