## 8 ‘WHY DO BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE?’

To go back to the issues of kamma and vipāka, a question that was often asked in the Buddha’s time, and is also asked now, is how the events of our current or past lives affect the present. There are the folk beliefs I was describing about how we experience things in the present because of actions in the past. How true is that? What did the Buddha say about it? The folklore around this subject can be very deterministic, particularly in the Asian mythological realm.

In the Majjhima Nikāya, the Middle Length Discourses, there are two consecutive suttas which deal with this, Suttas 135 and 136, the ‘Lesser’ and ‘The Greater Exposition on Action’, the Cūḷa-kammavibhanga Sutta and the Mahā-kammavibhanga Sutta. The first one, the Cūḷa-, explains how the actions in a past life affect experience in the present life, and its approach is fairly mechanistic. In that sutta the Buddha says that if you are angry and violent and kill living beings, it’s likely that your lifespan in a future life will be short. If you are prone to anger and hatred in this life, in the future you are likely to be born ugly. If you are gentle and kind and helpful to other living beings, you are likely to be blessed with a long life; if you are harmless and kind and not prone to anger or hatred, but instead develop loving- kindness and gentleness, in lives to come you will be born beautiful. If you are stingy and selfish, you are likely to be born poor. If you are generous and open-handed, you are likely to be born into a situation of wealth or prosperity. It’s very much a case of: ‘Because of A , therefore B .’

These types of teachings and stories have a strong effect on culture and can lead to a very deterministic model. However, in the Mahā-kammavibhanga Sutta  the Buddha addresses the question of why someone who is violent, selfish or immoral might nevertheless be wealthy, powerful and comfortable, while someone who is kind, helpful, and generous suffers from horrible diseases and other dreadful things. In other words, why is it that sometimes bad things happen to good people and good things happen to bad people? In reply the Buddha points out that in the present lifetime someone may be virtuous, kind, helpful and unselfish, but may experience suffering due to the resonance from past actions in an earlier life, when they weren’t living so skilfully. Similarly, a person who is living unskilfully and unwholesomely now may in a previous life have developed a lot of goodness and created the causes for blessings and benefit in this life from past wholesome actions, although in this life they are caught up in delusion and are acting in an unskilful way – the Buddha’s malign cousin Devadatta is a classic example of this latter quality.

Although the Buddha does not spell it out in this particular sutta, please bear in mind that such kamma-vipāka is only one small factor in the mix, as mentioned above in his words to Moḷiya Sīvaka (S 36.21). The main cause of disease is that we have a body, which is biologically complex, and any one of its billions of functions can go wrong at any time (this is what ‘balancing the humours of bile, phlegm and wind’ refers to). Years ago I did a degree in physiology and psychology; at the end of three years of studying the human body I was left with awe and the question: ‘How can it all work? It’s SO hyper-intricate it’s amazing we can even bend a finger, let alone pole-vault…’. I’d therefore suggest that the reason why we never hear of the problem of empty hospitals is more to do with biology (bija-niyāma), rather than reaping the results of past personal actions.

What we experience now is thus informed by all five niyāmas and the aspect of kamma-niyāma does not necessarily match solely what we do in this life, but can also be a resonance from past lives, maybe from thousands of lifetimes ago.

According to one of the commentarial stories, the Buddha once had a headache for three days and his attendant Ānanda, who was always trying to make everything right for the Buddha, was extremely concerned. He tried to get Jīvaka the doctor to help obtain medicines for him, but the Buddha said something like: ‘Ānanda, it’s not possible that you can do anything to alleviate this headache. In a lifetime many, many aeons ago, when I was a small boy, I caught a fish in a pond in the village and bashed its head three times on a rock to kill it. What I am experiencing now is the effect of killing that fish in that way, and this headache is going to go on for three days, until it has run its course, so there is nothing you can do about it.’ In that particular instance the Buddha could see this resonance many ages after the source event had occurred.

Another interesting example of this kind of resonance, again concerned with unskilful action, is with the former bandit and murderer Angulimāla. When he was a monk and went on alms- round, the relatives of his victims and other people too would throw things at him, and abuse and attack him. The Aṅgulimāla Sutta (M 86) describes the scene:

Then, when it was morning, the Venerable Aṅgulimāla dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthi for alms. Now on that occasion someone threw a clod of earth and hit his body, someone else threw a stick, and someone else threw a potsherd and hit him with it.

Then, with blood running from his cut head, with his bowl broken and with his robe torn, the Venerable Aṅgulimāla went to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One saw him coming in the distance and told him: ‘Bear it, brahmin! Bear it! You are experiencing here and now the result of deeds because of which you might have been tortured in hell for many years, for many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years.’ (M 86.17, Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi, trans.)

He did indeed bear it well as he was already an Arahant when these incidents occurred. At the other end of the spectrum, the Buddha often talked about the effects of wholesome action; for example:

I recall that for a long time I experienced the desirable, lovely, agreeable result of merit that had been made over a long time. For seven years I developed a mind of loving- kindness. As a consequence, for seven aeons of universal dissolution and expansion I did not come back to this world. When the universe was dissolving I was born in the Ābhassara brahma-realm, of streaming radiance. When the universe was expanding, I was reborn in an empty mansion of Brahmā. There I was … the Great Brahmā, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of mastery. I was Sakka, ruler of the devas, thirty- six times. (A 7.62)

So our actions can ripen in the immediate future, they can ripen in the near future or they can ripen in the far future; and they can ripen in equal, stronger or weaker ways, according to circumstance. To me the juxtaposition of these two suttas – one of which says ‘Every volitional action will necessarily cause a related result’; while the other says: ‘Exactly how, when and where that result will manifest is necessarily uncertain’ – is a perfect teaching on the issue. The world is pre-conditioned but not pre-determined, and the future is conditioned by the choices we make here and now.