## PREFACE

This small book is the fourth in a series of four, consisting of reflections and practices related to the ‘sublime abiding places for the heart’ – the four brahma-vihāras, in Buddhist parlance. They are also known as ‘the four immeasurables’ on account of the boundless, radiant quality of their nature.

The vision for the series is to explore these sublime abidings via the somewhat oblique approach of looking at their opposites. The four brahma-vihāras are listed, in the Buddhist

scriptures, as:

Mettā – loving-kindness, benevolence, radical acceptance, non-aversion.

Karuṇā – compassion, empathy, appreciation of the suffering of others.

Muditā – sympathetic or altruistic joy, gladness at the good fortune of others.

Upekkhā – equanimity, caring even-mindedness, serenity amid all turbulence.

In this last book we will be investigating upekkhā and this through the lens of superstitious views about why and how things happen as they do. This might seem a very unusual approach to the development of this sublime quality, said to be the most subtle and expansive of the brahma-vihāras, however, one of the Buddha’s most common reflections to support the cultivation of upekkhā is precisely and solely an investigation of causality: ‘I am the owner of my action, companion to my to my action … whatever action I do, for good or for ill, of that I will be the heir.’

It is often through distorted views about nature and its laws that we take its ups and downs in a very personal way; such an attitude is guaranteed to cause agitation and to disturb any equanimity we might have had. In this volume we will explore some of those distortions – whether it be that: ‘I’m individually responsible for everything that happens,’ or at the other extreme: ‘I am a victim of Fate, of the caprices of the gods who rule our karma’ – and see how the teachings of the Buddha might offer a fresh perspective, clarifying the view and bringing true serenity.

The other three books in the series, similarly, explore the remaining brahma-vihāras through aspects of mind and behaviour that oppose or confuse them.

The material published in this book is mostly based a Sunday afternoon talk, given at Amaravati in the summer of 2012. As they are at such talks, and as with all teachings offered in the Buddhist tradition, the words here are presented for the reader’s contemplation rather than being intended to be taken

as absolute truths. Those who pick this book up and read it are therefore encouraged to consider whether these principles and practices feel true to life and, if they do, to try them out and see if they bring benefit. Do they help you to deal more easily with the way you see the events of your life and the world? Do they lead you to a recognition of the balance of the Middle Way? Do they help you to be an embodiment of serenity in the midst of agitation, to ‘keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you,’ as Rudyard Kipling put it? If so, that is to be rejoiced.

If, however, these words don’t help you, then may you find other wholesome ways of finding peace with the ups and downs and agitations that are such a stressful part of our lives.

[A NOTE TO THE READER – the Pali terms ‘kamma-vipāka’ (meaning ‘action and its result’) and the now colloquial English ‘karma’ (meaning: ‘the sum of a person’s actions in one of his successive states of existence, regarded as determining his fate in the next; hence, necessary fate or destiny,’ OED) are used broadly and in an interchangeable way throughout this book.]