## 10 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question: The degree of equanimity that an individual can reach based on the insight that you mention seems to me to be limited by what life actually throws at them. For example, in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge regime some two million people died from hunger, exhaustion, disease or ill-treatment; the whole population was faced with appalling oppression. This brings up the whole question of the phenomenon of ‘equanimity’ as something almost separate from everything else.

Answer: I’d say that the equanimity will be different in degree – technically there are three levels: based on diversity, based on unity, and based on non-identification (M 137.18-20) – but the deciding factor is the spiritual fortitude, the attitude of the individual towards the situation, as opposed to the intensity of suffering that is being visited upon them. For one with a liberated heart, it’s essentially the same quality in all situations.

That said, in the scriptures you find a couple of different standards represented. Firstly, in suttas  such as the famous ‘Simile of the Saw’ (M 21) we hear the Buddha saying:

Even if bandits were to sever you savagely limb from limb with a two-handled saw, one who gave rise to a mind of hatred towards them would not be carrying out my teaching.

He then adds that, instead, one’s mind should remain:

[U]naffected, filled with compassion for the welfare of those who are doing the sawing – ‘We shall abide pervading them with a mind imbued with loving-kindness; and, starting with them, we shall abide pervading the entire world with all-encompassing loving-kindness.’ [So too with compassion, appreciative joy and equanimity.] (M21.20)

And in ‘The Advice to Puṇṇa’ (M 145), when Venerable Puṇṇa asks to go to remote and lawless Sunāparanta, the Buddha says to him:

‘Puṇṇa, the people of Sunāparanta are fierce and rough. If they abuse and threaten you, what will you think then?’

To which he replies:

‘Venerable Sir, if the people of Sunāparanta abuse and threaten me then I will think, “These people of Sunāparanta are truly kind in that they refrain from hitting me with their fists”.’

The Buddha then tests his attitude toward ever more extreme possible assaults, up to the point of him being knifed to death.

Venerable Puṇṇa responds with the same evenness, always looking on the bright side of the situation. Following this the Buddha declares:

‘Good, good, Puṇṇa! Possessing such self-control and peacefulness, you will be able to dwell in Sunāparanta.’ (M 145.5-6)

As a counterbalance to this approach, there is also the encouragement no to go looking for trouble, if one can avoid it. One of ‘the eighteen faults of a monastery’ listed in the Visuddhimagga (a commentary written about 1000 years after the Buddha lived) is ‘living in a contested border area or a battle zone’. (Vsm IV 16)

One of the nuns at Amaravati was married to the Deputy Prime Minister of Cambodia before the Khmer Rouge takeover. She and her children were airlifted out of Phnom Penh but her husband chose to stay behind in the hope of being able to continue to serve his country. She does not know his fate. She managed to build a new life in the US afterwards, but was extremely angry with the Khmer Rouge for the terrible suffering and destruction they meted out in Cambodia. Although she’d grown up in a Buddhist country she hadn’t developed much in the way of meditation skills, but when she realized the degree of turbulence and anger within her, she began to draw close to the Moral Re-Armament group, and started to work towards reconciliation and equanimity in relation to what had happened. It took her a good ten years of direct effort and work to achieve that equanimity. Eventually she became a committed Buddhist and decided to be become a nun. More importantly, she came to a place of resolution within, where she realized that by cultivating and dwelling in hatred and aversion, she was only creating more negative karma.

On a much more familiar everyday scale, even tiny everyday acts – coping with traffic (noticing that ‘I’ am never ‘traffic’; only ‘they’ are) or having to wait some extra time before getting a cup of tea at a cafe because someone jumps the queue – can give rise to patience and offer opportunities to develop equanimity. Equanimity doesn’t mean that you approve of something or should try to make yourself like it. On a larger scale, it means recognizing that the amount of destruction and evil caused by forces such as the Khmer Rouge regime is a horrifically painful part of the natural order, but part of nature none the less. You don’t condone it, but you acknowledge that these are the extremes some people can go to and have gone to, and those are the results.

Obviously one can’t be glib about such things, but through equanimity one sees their causes and effects. One also realizes the extreme states of delusion to which those who carry out such acts are subject, and the terrible states of mind and the miserable realms they create for themselves and others.

Evil is often viewed as a separate force in the universe, as something that is outside of nature. When I came into contact with Buddhist teachings and found out they didn’t have this view of evil, that seemed to make much more sense. In the Buddhist teachings there is no concept of an absolute evil. In Buddhist mythology the embodiment of that which is unwholesome is Māra, who is the Lord of Death, the trickster, the one who is always trying to fool the Buddha or his disciples into getting caught up in aversion or desire and so forth. The word māra literally means ‘death’ (‘amara’ means ‘deathless,’ as in ‘Amaravati – the Deathless Realm’), so Māra is the embodiment of death and delusion. But in Buddhist mythology Māra is not an absolute evil, but merely a being who is temporarily in a extremely deluded state. In the Māra-tajjanīya Sutta (M 50), Mahā-Moggallāna, one of the Buddha’s two leading disciples, is attacked and physically invaded by Māra. But Moggallāna reminds Māra that during the life of the Buddha Kakusandha there was a different Māra called Dūsi. Dūsi had a sister called Kālī whose son is the current Māra; while the Māra Dūsi has now been reborn as… Mahā-Moggallāna himself. So the current Māra is, albeit across a few lifetimes, the great Arahant’s nephew.

Even though this is a Buddhist fairy tale, to me it‘s very significant that, mythologically, a being who is supposed to be the incarnation of evil could, through many subsequent lifetimes of spiritual training, work off that delusion and break free from it, to the extent of becoming totally enlightened and a leading disciple of the Buddha. Now, you can view all this symbolical rather than as historical fact, and I would encourage that, but to me that’s a very powerful message: that no wrong- doing is incurable.

Another interesting link is that between mass-murderer Aṅgulimāla and safe child-birth. After Aṅgulimāla became a bhikkhu, one day on his alms-round he came across a woman who was trying to give birth, but the child wouldn’t come, and she was in terrible pain, weeping and wailing. Aṅgulimāla felt enormous compassion, but also helplessness – there seemed to be nothing he could do. So he went back to the Buddha and described what he had seen, and the Buddha said:

‘Go back to the woman and say to her: “Ever since I was born, I have never knowingly taken the life of another living being, and by the power of this truth may you and your child be well and be at ease”.’

Aṅgulimāla politely pointed out that in fact he had taken the lives of many beings, so those words would not be true. But the Buddha replied:

‘Say to her then: “Since I have been born into the Noble Birth [i.e. since becoming a bhikkhu] I have never knowingly taken the life of another living being, and by the power of this truth, may you and your child be at ease”.’ (M 86.14-15)

Aṅgulimāla went back and recited those words to the woman, and she then gave birth quite easily. Ever since then that verse has been used as a blessing for expectant mothers right up to the present day. So, although Aṅgulimāla had killed 999 people, someone who was extraordinarily destructive and harmful was transformed by wisdom to become a force of blessing and of goodness. (As a footnote to this – over the thirty-six years I have been a bhikkhu, my experience of the Aṅgulimāla Paritta has been that it has apparently been 100% effective; every time I know of it having been chanted, the mother and child have always come through the birth process OK. Of course this might just be chance and coincidence but that does not diminish the fact that it has happened that way.)

To me, then, evil is not something outside of nature, but I would say that it entails a depth of delusion whereby the mind is completely lost in its own self-obsessions. There is an interesting book called ‘Zero Degrees of Empathy’ by the eminent psychiatrist Simon Baron-Cohen1 whose thesis in this book is that true acts of evil are extremely rare in the world, and that more often than not, what we call ‘evil’ comes from an absence of empathy. Thus those concerned are completely obsessed with their own perspective and have no capacity to empathize with their victims. I thought it was an interesting point, and fairly made, that it is actually quite rare for someone to commit a deliberate malicious, destructive act, knowing that it is wrong and bad, and that more often people who do what we call ‘evil’ think they are doing good, in their own terms, and according to their own strange and distorted logic.

Question: How does one let go of attachment to personal possessions like one’s house or car?

Answer: One direct and helpful thing you can do is to use Ajahn Chah’s encouragement to recognize that the car is already broken. Temporarily it is moving and apparently it is under your control, but it is really a broken car, a lost car, and one day its end will come; it will stop working. At the moment it is functioning and you can enjoy its use, but it is an impermanent car. As you bring such thoughts to mind, something in the citta may protest: ‘It’s not really gone, it’s here and it’s mine!’ But simply to raise the thought is to recognize the reality of the car’s impermanence – how could that not be so? Also, if you pass that particular layer of defensiveness and anxiety, something in the heart recognizes: ‘Well, of course! There was a time before I bought it when this car wasn’t mine, and there will be a time when it isn’t mine again. So owning this car is just a temporary arrangement; how could it not be?’ And it’s not intrinsically a car either; all the elements came together to make it in the first place and eventually they must separate again, just as the Arahant Bhikkhunī Vajirā described, with the simile of a chariot, when dismissing Māra one day:

Just as, with an assemblage of parts, the word ‘chariot’ is used, so, when the khandhās [the integration of mind and body] exist, there is the convention of ‘being’. (S 5.10)

You can try using a simple phrase like: ‘This is a broken car; this is a demolished house,’ and when that feeling of: ‘Yes, but it is,  mine, and I’m going to keep it!’ arises, bring your attention to that feeling and notice how uncomfortable it is. Or during your meditation you can visualize handing over the keys of the house or the car to someone else and saying: ‘It’s all yours!’

Until we know the pain of attachment, we won’t really let go. Until we really recognize how painful it is to feel: ‘That’s my car, my house,’ we won’t really let go of our attachment to them. Until we recognize the tension and painfulness of clinging and holding on to material objects, or more intangible qualities such as reputation or health, and see what a burden and an effort that clinging is, we won’t really let go of them. That simple reflection is a helpful tool.

Question: The last time I heard the words ‘Who’s pulling the strings?’ it was Luang Por Sumedho talking in relation to Ajahn Chah telling his villagers, five years before Ajahn Sumedho arrived, that there would be a white monk from the West coming Wat Pah Pong. That seems to indicate that he could see the future, and suggests that the future is already fixed.

Answer: When some people are very attuned to the way things are, they can pick up threads, patterns of causal connection and suchlike within their experience. I couldn’t say exactly what Ajahn Chah had experienced or why he would have said that to his villagers. I too have heard that story, that when they were building a kūṭi2 at the monastery it seems the carpenter thought they were wasting wood and asked: ‘Hey, Luang Por, how come we’re building it so tall? It’s much higher than it needs to be,’ and Ajahn Chah replied: ‘Some farang  (foreigners) will come and they’re much taller than we are, so it needs to be this high.’ These things are somewhat mysterious. There is no such thing as totally ‘fixed’ karma, but there are strong tendencies, such as with the Bodhisattva and the fish; there are causal relations which are extremely potent. The night before the Buddha’s enlightenment he had a series of five dreams which all predicted that he was about to attain complete enlightenment. There are sometimes currents which are extremely powerful, and someone who is very attuned to the causational field is able to discern those currents. Also, the experience of time is quite subjective. In those states of attunement and clarity of vision, things that have happened in the far past or might happen in the future can take shape and may become apparent.

Question: Without being deterministic, I wonder if at some level everything is known.

Answer: I wouldn’t say ‘known’, but there are causal connections, there are likelihoods or patterns that are in place, although the very fact that things are not fixed means that the choices we make here and now make a difference. It’s more like strong tendencies or likelihoods which take shape. Again, I wouldn’t want to profess any direct knowledge of those kinds of abilities because I don’t have them, but my understanding is that when somebody makes a prediction like that, they are talking about some strong intuition that they have. When Ajahn Chah had that conversation with the carpenter, Ajahn Sumedho was probably not yet in Thailand but I never heard the details of the timing of that myself.

Exactly how these things work I can’t say but, seeing those patterns of causal relationship and how they work, also means recognizing that, yes, they are connected, but they are also unpredictable. Who you are now is connected to what you were like when you were one year old, but all kinds of things have happened since then which have caused you to be the way you are today. When you were one year old you couldn’t predict exactly what you would be like now, but there were certain trends and possibilities and likelihoods. But they weren’t fixed, they were not a sure thing. So people who have this type of perception are speaking on the basis of a strong likelihood, but I would say there is still always the potential that things may take a different direction.

Question: My question is whether karma is always individual or whether maybe sometimes we receive the karma of our ancestors. In a way that would be a blessing because it would not be a punishment but an opportunity to learn, so in that way we could bless them as well and what we do could help to heal other generations.

Answer: In terms of classic Buddhist psychology there isn’t any such thing as group karma or family karma. Karma concerns the actions of the individual. But things are related, so that we inherit the effects of our parents’ our grandparents’ karma: their choices of where to live, what kind of occupations they chose to follow, the things that they did. We receive their effects, but karma is really to do with our own actions. So you may feel that the choices your grandparents made have resulted in your having a difficult or painful situation in this lifetime, but you can take that pain or difficulty and learn lessons from it. And you can share the merits, the puñña of your life and its blessings with your grandparents, in whatever state of being they might now be.

Furthermore, bear in mind that those inheritances might be filled with blessings rather than curses. My maternal grandfather, Carl Goldschmidt, was a universally respected man in the family and in his work. He was quiet, sweet-natured and was still running his own business up until when he died at 95. He had never fired an employee. He was the humanitarian axis of my family so, on the question of inheriting the effects of the choices of our forebears: Great! I’ve been more than happy to receive some of the effects of his actions.

On a practical level karma is to do with the personal choices that we make here and now. Through karma we can connect our minds with the lives of others. We can think about others, even through simple things like sending a birthday card or a Christmas card. You send someone a card and they know: ‘She’s thinking of me – how nice!’ We can make gestures of connection on a practical, ordinary material level, but which have an effect. It’s also recognized that on the psychological plane, the sharing of blessings by dedicating the wholesome results of a good action to someone else has an effect of helping that person, of bringing benefit into their lives in some way. People often say: ‘This sharing of merit is just superstition, it’s an Asian custom, you don’t find it in the suttas.’ But you do, actually, in the Aṅguttara Nikāya (A 7.53), in a sutta called ‘Nandamātā’ Nanda’s mother describes making an offering and sharing the benefits of it with the deva Vessavaṇa, one of the Four Great Kings, and there are other instances in the suttas too. So sharing merit is substantiated in the Pali texts, but although you hear expressions like ‘national karma’ or ‘group karma’ or ‘family karma’, and people are free to use those terms if they wish, you don’t really find them substantiated in the Buddhist tradition. You don’t find the Buddha speaking in that way; in his terminology kamma has quite a narrow definition. It is the choices made by an individual based on intention; it’s an intentional act and vipāka is its result. Breathing wouldn’t be considered making kamma because it’s just a biological function, but the choice to get up and make a cup of tea or punch your neighbour on the nose would be a personal act that you chose to do, and so would have a positive, negative or neutral effect.

Question: I’ve heard many times that when something negative happens to you, it was due to your negative karma from a previous life. But is it not possible for something negative to happen to you based on the negative karma from somebody else? If, for instance, a bus-load of people goes over a cliff and all fifty of them die, I find it hard to believe that those fifty people at that time all suffered negative karma.

Answer: That’s exactly  what I’ve been saying! Personal actions only play a relatively small part. The very fact that you have a human body, that you happen be alive, means that you can be subject at any time to sickness and death, or to great good fortune, which might have absolutely nothing to do with any personal action of yours whatsoever. Because you happen to be alive, because you happen to have a body, accidents may happen to you.

The main theme of my teaching here is that this whole idea of ‘it must be someone’s bad karma’ needs adjusting. People are born, so they are bound to die at some point. Personal karma may not necessarily be involved at all. The cause of death is birth. Death is going to happen to all of us in some way or other, everyone is going to die. That’s how it is, that’s the natural order; one day our bodies are all going to die in some way, shape or form, somewhere or other. The Buddha’s way of speaking about this is very practical and direct; kamma is the action of an individual based on intention, from which comes the result, vipāka.

In this example the bus driver might have experienced some karmic effect, while for the passengers it was just random chance that the bus went over the cliff. What they would do with that final moment would be up to each one of them. But they might have got on that bus by pure chance. Similarly, there’s a strong random element in the combination of DNA which came together from our mother and father before we were born, in exactly how the different bits lined up and joined together to form this pattern here or that pattern there. A lot of it is random. It’s not that there are The Gods of Karma who decide what lessons a being needs to learn and then and have a committee meeting to decide how line up the four nucleotides that make up the code in your DNA – adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine. There’s a lot of randomness in the way the natural order functions, and we often read into events a lot more meaning than is genuinely there. To me, if you really think about the different niyāmas  and the variety of laws that are functioning, this broadens the scope enormously.

It is a weird folk belief that everything that happens must be due to someone’s individual karma. Certainly, there’s the fact of having been being born but apart from that what happens to a person doesn’t necessarily have anything to do with actions in a past life, or even in this life. I hope to have given some perspective on this, because these ideas about karma form a very strong pattern of belief in our culture, even among non- Buddhists. So when they come up, either in your own mind or when other people raise them, I would encourage you to stop and think about them for a minute.

Since we have a body and a mind, we can experience a whole range of different possibilities. When things go well or badly we can interpret this in certain fashions, but they may involve an awful lot of projection and superstition. Thus we abdicate from our capacity to make a difference. Even when things go really badly, when we develop a horrible disease, experience a terrible accident or are treated harshly, the attitude we have to those things is entirely up to us and we can try to learn from them. That’s always within our power. When we adopt the fatalistic attitude that everything is fixed, that it’s just karma and there’s nothing we can do about it, we’re taking things personally rather than seeing things in terms of nature and its laws and thus are abdicating from our capacity to learn from events, to make good use of them and see what blessings can come from them. We are not making use of the resources that we have. If instead we shift the perspective to setting an intention to try to learn from whatever shape things take in our lives, whether it’s pleasant or painful or neutral, and always ask: ‘What can I learn from this? What does this teach me?’ we stop thinking in terms of good karma, bad karma, good luck and bad luck and instead we take more responsibility for our own lives. We realize that this attitude liberates us – whether we are in a fortunate situation or a painful one, whether we’re being oppressed and mistreated, or whether things are very blessed and easeful – how we react is always up to us.

Question: I’m a bit worried by the Buddha’s statement concerning the fish he hit on the head in a past life. I wonder if that tallies with the other things that you’ve been saying today. It sounds to me more like a joke. Or is it that if we grow closer to enlightenment, if we become more perceptive, we will become more aware of or likely to perceive connections from past lives? To me it seems that the Buddha’s saying: ‘Don’t bother to try to cure my headache’ is almost contrary to what you have been teaching.

Answer: It is indeed almost  contrary, and that crossed my mind as I was saying it, but I also said: ‘There is no such thing as totally ‘fixed’ karma, but there are strong tendencies.’ Some people, when their minds are very attuned and awakened, have the capacity to see into particular threads of past lives, but others do not. Mahā-Moggallāna had enormously powerful psychic abilities, but the Buddha’s other chief disciple, Sāriputta, although he was a very good meditator, had none. He couldn’t read people’s minds, he couldn’t see past lives, while Moggallāna could even visit different realms of beings, such as the brahma-realms. In this particular instance of the Buddha’s headache, I would say that he realized that the karmic resonance was so strong no medicine could alleviate it, just as with Aṅgulimāla.

Another, more neutral example that Ajahn Chah would often give was about the habit of the Buddha’s other chief disciple, Sāriputta, of skipping over puddles:

There are of course those things that we can not change – they are called residual tendencies (vāsanā) – but our attitudes, our behaviour can be changed.

Like in the story of Venerable Sāriputta, who would skip over puddles when he came to them. He had been a monkey in his past life and this tendency remained. Even as an Enlightened One he would go skipping over puddles, but this doesn’t mean he was being heedless. As disciples of the Buddha, we cannot remove vāsanā – only a Buddha can do that. Venerable Sāriputta liked hopping from time to time, but he was also full of profound wisdom. It was merely vāsanā in this case.

(Ajahn Chah, ‘Self-Training,’

Forest Sangha Newsletter, July 1990)

Cause and effect are a reality in the world, but the effects of an action are not fixed, although occasionally the currents are so strong that an effect is effectively unstoppable, like the inevitability of the Buddha’s enlightenment. At other times the causal connections are weaker and can fade out or be diverted. In the end it’s up to us what we do with it all; as the Buddha says in the Dhammapada (Dhp 160) and which Ajahn Chah was also fond of quoting, ‘Atta hi attano natho ko hi natho paro siya… – ultimately we need to be our own authority for who else can we depend on?’

You should live as islands unto yourselves, being your own refuge, with no one else as your refuge, with the Dhamma as an island, the Dhamma as your refuge, with no other refuge. (D 16.2.26)

1 Penguin, Allen Lane, 2011

2 A cabin in which monastics live or undertake solitary retreats.