## 6 ‘IS THIS A CONSCIOUS UNIVERSE?’

This role of pāramitā, the concept of a ‘field of blessings’, is also interesting in terms of considering the possibility of a causational, or moral universe. Again, this might sound a little extreme, but we can also consider that this is a conscious universe. We know that we are conscious. We are conscious of our lives, of our bodies; we are aware of the stars and planets, and all the space out there which constitutes the physical universe, and of ourselves as individuals on this planet. But in the sphere of modern physics it’s also interesting to look at the microscopic world of particle physics, to shrink the area of attention and look at the subatomic world, where it becomes harder and harder to define what is being seen as separate from the way it is being seen and who or what is seeing it. As the well-known physicist John Wheeler wrote:

No elementary phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon.

JA Wheeler & WH Zurek, ‘Quantum Theoryand Measurement’, Princeton, 2014, p 202

You can’t say that something exists until you’ve observed it. You can’t say that it is or what it is unless it’s observed. Another physicist put it like this:

The fact that all the properties of particles are determined by principles closely related to the method of observation would mean that the basic structures of the material world are determined ultimately by the way we look at this world, that the observed patterns of matter are reflections of patterns of mind.

Fritjof Capra, ‘The Turning Point’,Simon and Schuster, 1982, p 93

Moment by moment we are not experiencing an objective world; rather we’re experiencing our mind’s representation of the world.

When the Buddha talked about the question: ‘What is the world?’ He said:

That in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world, a conceiver of the world – this is called ‘the world’ in this teaching. And what, friends … is that ‘world’? The eye … the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … [and] the mind are that in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world, a conceiver of the world – [therefore] this is called ‘the world’ in this teaching. (S 35.116)

It’s not saying that the whole world is just a dream but it’s saying that our version, our experience of the world is conjured into being through the activity of our senses and our human brains. Again, we can reflect that both the world of experience and the universe as a whole have the element of causality woven into them. Not only are the forces of gravity and chemistry and physics involved, but so is our conscious mind, the element of consciousness. So what is experienced is also dependent on how it is being experienced, and our mind is involved in exactly how the world appears. This is a significant element in terms of how we can usefully apply the Buddha’s teachings. The Buddha points to understanding the things that control our lives, and that what we experience is not just the effects of events in past lives, but also results from the laws of nature. Our lives are controlled by the laws of physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, and also by the laws of Dhamma itself – the laws of cause and effect, kamma and vipāka. This makes our experience a lot less personal. If we think we are experiencing an illness because of something really nasty that we did in a past life, or because of something that somebody has done to us, that makes things very personal. But if instead we broaden this view to see that what we are experiencing is according to the natural laws, and that personal choice by either ourselves or other people is only a small proportion of those laws, this makes the experience a lot more easy to digest. It leads directly to upekkhā – that serenity of heart that is the ‘still point of the turning world’, as TS Eliot put it. This is the capacity to be fully open and attuned to all things yet utterly unperturbed by their agitation, physical or emotional. The heart is fully open to the world yet serene, balanced and equanimous.

Even when we specifically look at how the law of kamma and vipāka operates and not at the other laws – only at our actions and the effects of those actions – that too brings a kind of evenness to our experience. When we are able to see that what we are experiencing is affected to some degree by our actions, and are able to consider that if we do something it’s going to have an effect, this brings a quality of equanimity to our experience. When we are able to see that what we experience comes about according to these inexorable and immutable laws, there’s much more of a balance within ourselves: ‘How could it be otherwise?’ And there is peace.