## 3 ‘WHAT LAWS GOVERN LIFE AND THE UNIVERSE?’

The model that the Buddha described to Moḷiya Sīvaka has been formalized and expanded and is now known as ‘The Five Niyāmas’ or ‘Laws of Nature’. It may be helpful to spell these five laws out since, in this present moment, the Buddha’s teaching suggests we are experiencing the effects of all these five different laws of nature, which are all operating simultaneously.

The first of them is called utu-niyāma. Utu literally means ‘weather’ or ‘temperature, seasons and other physical events’, so utu-niyāma means the laws of physics and chemistry. When we talk about what we experience, we don’t always take into account or appreciate the fact that we have a physical body, that this is a physical universe. We experience the results of the way matter works, the configurations of the material world and how the physical laws operate.

The second law is bija-niyāma or the laws of biology. Bija literally means ‘seed’, so as human beings we are subject to the laws of biology, genetics. We have a human body. We need to breathe. We need to eat. We exist as part of a social group. We are of the subspecies homo sapiens sapiens. We are a particular species of creature living on this particular planet, with physical bodies and particular social patterns and forms, so we are the offspring of the biological universe. We breathe air, we are aerobic. We may think that these aspects of our life are ordinary, unremarkable, but a huge part of who and what we are is determined by utu-niyāma and bija-niyāma, by the laws of physics, chemistry and biology. What we experience during the course of a day is very much woven into these laws, but they can seem unremarkable, and we don’t often use them to judge or distinguish each other. We all breathe. There’s nobody who doesn’t. Nobody decides to start the New Year by giving up breathing or giving up gravity. We’re all subject to the law of gravity: there’s the planet, there’s a body and between them is the force we call gravity. These are things we experience all the time. I can feel the weight of my body on this chair as I type, so I know the force of gravity is operating. We’re breathing all the time. If any of us stopped breathing for five minutes, we’d be dead.

These are very significant and central aspects of our life which we all experience in the same way, all day long, every day. They’re not news. It doesn’t make the newspaper headlines that everybody keeps breathing. What does make the headlines is that so and so’s been elected, so and so’s been killed, so and so’s been born, so and so’s won a prize, so and so’s caused a scandal.

It’s the individual actions we take which get our attention. So the third of the laws is kamma-niyāma; the law of action and its result, or the law of the way personal choices function and the effects those choices have. Kamma-niyāma refers to the laws that govern the way effects take shape as a result of the personal choices that we make. Because we tend to give this third law credit for causing all the things we experience in our life, it gets far more attention than the first two, but I think it is also important to realize that our actions, and the laws of cause and effect which relate to our actions and our choices, are only relevant within the wider context of the whole natural order, within utu-niyāma and bija-niyāma – physics, chemistry, biology and the consequent laws of evolution. The fourth of these laws is called citta-niyāma or the laws of psychology: how the mind works, how we think, the way memory works; how a thought-moment takes shape, the speed of thinking, the way emotions work, in short the laws of mental activity and the whole of the psychological realm. These laws of the mental realm function in the same way as the laws of physics, chemistry and biology, and all these laws interrelate with each other. We feel, think, remember and plan in certain ways and according to certain patterns because that’s part of the natural system. That’s how minds work.

The fifth law is the over-arching and all-encompassing dhamma-niyāma, the fundamental law of reality, encompassing the full physical and mental spectrum and beyond what is describable – the relationship between the conditioned reality and the unconditioned reality. It means the laws of how the realms of form, time, space and mind all operate – including the unconditioned, the unborn, the unoriginated, uncreated, the timeless and formless – the all- encompassing and all-embracing laws of reality at its most fundamental level. Dhamma-niyāma  is how all these integrate and uphold the reality of the way things are.

At any one moment all five of these laws are operating simultaneously, so what we experience right now is not just the results of personal actions. Choosing to listen to a Dhamma talk or read a teaching leads you to experience an effect because of that particular karma, that choice, but it’s also the result of the very fact of hearing or seeing. The mind taking that sound or sight, and interpreting it and giving it meaning, is citta-niyāma. And the need to breathe, the feeling of the weight of the body on the chair, are related to the laws of physics, chemistry and biology. They all play into what we experience in one moment; at any moment all of these elements are playing together.

So when we are considering who is pulling the strings, the Buddhist answer would be: ‘Wrong question’. ‘Who?’ is the wrong question. It’s not a matter of who but rather of understanding how these different forces, these different laws that contribute to our experience, operate and function in relationship to each other. In addition, it’s an issue of recognizing that karma, action, personal choices, form just a tiny proportion of the whole array. But they are the ones that get our attention, because they’re the ones that are most varied or unpredictable, and because we love to personalize things and that’s what sells the tabloids.