## 4 ‘IS NATURE FAIR?’

A lot of our suffering, of dukkha, comes from a feeling of dissatisfaction or discontent because we think: ‘It shouldn’t be this way,’ ‘Life is unfair,’ ‘Why is this happening to me?’ or ‘Not this again – I don’t deserve this!’ Our discontent can easily be caused by a feeling that somehow the universe is out of balance, the world is out of order, and we feel this is unfair; it shouldn’t be like that. But if we expand our vision and see that the laws of cause and effect are operating, that all these different aspects of reality are contributing to our life, then how could what we are experiencing be fundamentally outside the laws of nature? How could it genuinely be unfair? It might be unfair according to our preferences, or your nation’s laws; it might also be unwanted or not what we expected. But when we expand our view and take the whole range of different influences that are at play into its scope, we are able to let go of that feeling of wrongness or that it shouldn’t be this way. There’s a recognition that nature is fair: it’s a non-personal and ultimately balanced system, and once we drop our self-centred habits and are able to see things in this way, we are much more able to find the quality of ‘rightness’. Even though we might be experiencing an illness, or something painful or difficult which we wouldn’t choose or we don’t like, that feeling of wrongness or that it shouldn’t be this way dissolves.

The Buddha gave a small collection of teachings called the ‘Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection’ (A 5.57). The first of these is: ‘I am of the nature to age.’ The second is: ‘I am of the nature to sicken.’ The third is: ‘I am of the nature to die.’ The fourth is: ‘All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will become separated from me’; and the fifth is: ‘I am the owner of my karma, heir to my karma, born of my karma, related to my karma, abide supported by my karma; whatever karma I shall do, for good or for ill, of that I will be the heir.’ This reflection helps us to develop equanimity, upekkhā, in relationship to our lives. It counteracts the feeling that the gods are being unkind, or that if we do something harmful maybe we’ll get away with it; if nobody notices, we won’t get caught and punished. At the other end of the scale, if we do something good and are worried that we won’t get any beneficial results for it, that we won’t be rewarded or there won’t be a good result, we’re equally the heirs to those good actions too, born of them and abide supported by them. Whatever actions we do, of those we will be the heirs. This is cause and effect. In a way it’s just as inexorable as physics, chemistry and biology. It’s just the way the natural order works, and although these reflections can be very challenging or sobering, they are also gloriously realistic;  something in the heart relaxes and says: ‘This is just how it is, this is the natural order of things.’

Complaining about the natural order is rather like the logic of a three-year-old who says: ‘Bad rain, you shouldn’t be here today! I want to play in the garden. Go away, rain, you’re spoiling my game!’ In the same way, we blame the changes and events in our lives and take them personally. But the Buddha’s teaching naturally encourages us to create karmic influences, to take actions which will make the experience of our life more pleasant and more beneficial to others. It’s not that if you do good the gods will reward you and hand you prizes, while if you do evil they will punish you, send you down to hell and imprison you in a miserable state. The Buddha’s teaching is much more a system of ethics based on our psychology, on the natural systems of our mind, rather than on reward and punishment by invisible spirits or the caprices and whims of different gods. In mythology, the Greek, Norse or Egyptian gods are a pretty unruly bunch – very unreliable, unpredictable and subject to shallow mood-swings and foibles (Niobe once boasted of her fourteen children to Leto, who only had two; those two of Leto happened to be Artemis and Apollo, however, so the two of them killed every one of Niobe’s – she wept a great pool of tears for her lost children and weeps for them still… according to the myth). So, understandably, the worshippers of the ancient gods felt the need to keep them sweet and make substantial sacrifices to keep things going in their favour.

The Buddha teaches that what happens to us is not up to the gods, their moods and their rewards or punishments, but more to do with the actions that we take, with directing our minds towards what is skilful, what is wholesome. The ethics of Buddhism are psychological, insofar as we are the ones who create our rewards and punishments. As I said, if you act in a generous and kindly way your heart feels light and bright, you feel a quality of self-respect. If you act in a cruel, selfish and destructive way, your heart feels cramped, tight and heavy. That’s a natural result of selfish or destructive action. So rewards and punishments essentially come from the forces of our own nature, not from anything external to our own mind.