## 9 ‘HOW CAN I USE THESE IDEAS TO IMPROVE MY LIFE?’

There are a lot of interrelated subjects that have been presented here but perhaps the most crucial consideration is: ‘How do we practise with all of this?’ I would say that there is a three-part process to be employed, moment by moment:

1. To cultivate a radical acceptance (mettā) toward all of the influences arriving in the present; to accept this present reality with an open heart. This means to fully accept the effects of all past causes, whether they be physical, chemical, biological, karmic, psychological or spiritual.

2. This acceptance then blossoms as the attitude of upekkhā – even-mindedness, serenity in relationship to all experience, both the inner and outer worlds. The heart attunes to its own fundamental nature, Dhamma itself, the integrative principle that forms the fabric of reality. There is open-mindedness, groundedness, balance.

3. On that foundation, having accepted all those varied effects with equanimity – whether they be pleasant painful or neutral – to then work to plant good causes in the present. These good causes can best be described in the Buddha’s guidelines for Right Effort (sammā-vayamo):

a. Restraining the unwholesome from arising (saṃvara)

b. If the unwholesome has arisen, then letting it go (pahāna)

c. Cultivating the wholesome (bhāvanā)

d. If the wholesome has arisen, then maintaining it (anurakkhaṇa)

In other teachings he lists the qualities of wholesomeness thus, with the unwholesome being defined as their opposites:

And what is the wholesome? Refraining from killing living beings is wholesome; refraining from taking what is not given is wholesome; refraining from sexual misconduct is wholesome; refraining from false, malicious and harsh speech is wholesome; refraining from gossip is wholesome; unselfishness is wholesome; goodwill is wholesome; Right View is wholesome. This is called the wholesome. (M 9.6; also compare A 10.28 & A 10.176)

In making these efforts it is important not to drift into the self- view of: ‘Me doing something, to get somewhere,’ but rather to let the practice be guided by mindfulness and wisdom (sati- paññā). For when  sati-paññā is in the driving seat, then the practice is always in accord with the here-and-now reality, with Dhamma.

As long as you conceive yourself as being somebody who has to do something in order to become something else, you are still caught in a trap, a condition of mind, as being a self, and you never quite understand anything properly. No matter how many years you meditate, you will never really understand the teaching; you will always be just off the mark. The direct way of seeing things now – that whatever arises passes away – doesn’t mean that you are throwing anything away. It means that you’re looking as you’ve never bothered to look before. You’re looking from a perspective of what’s here now, rather than looking for something that’s not here.

‘Ajahn Sumedho, the Anthology’, Vol.3,

Amaravati Publications, 2014, p 38

Ajahn Chah often emphasized that everything that we are is part of nature and that Dhamma and nature are synonymous:

Whether a tree, a mountain or an animal, it’s all Dhamma, everything is Dhamma. Where is this Dhamma? Speaking simply, that which is not Dhamma doesn’t exist. Dhamma is nature. This is called the saccadhamma, the True Dhamma. If one sees nature, one sees Dhamma; if one sees Dhamma, one sees nature. Seeing nature, one knows the Dhamma.

‘The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah’,

Aruna Publications, 2011, p 485

When the mind is Dhamma, it stops. It has attained peace. There’s no longer a need to do anything special, because the mind is Dhamma already. The outside is Dhamma, the inside is Dhamma. The ‘one who knows’ is Dhamma. The state is Dhamma and that which knows the state is Dhamma. It is one. It is free. (ibid, p 696)

Thus, in a way, the universe pulls its own strings; it is a self- adjusting universe. That implies that our intentions as well as our actions are also part of the way things are – yet without reading that ‘way things are’ as any kind of pre-destination. So rather than thinking: ‘There is the universe, and I’m this separate entity apart from it who’s doing things with it,’ we need to realize that we are intrinsically involved in the universe. We are the universe; we are part of it, and the choices we make, the dispositions that we have and our intentions are part of the way things are. It’s not that what we do is imposing or intruding upon the world in some way, or interfering with it – ‘Do I dare disturb the universe?’ again, as TS Eliot put it – but simply that we are part of it. So when our hearts are in accord with reality, when we are attuned to that reality, our actions lead to wholesomeness, to pleasantness, to freedom and delight for ourselves. But when our actions are out of accord with reality and are, say, disharmonious or destructive, there’s naturally a painful result. Our actions are still part of the natural order, but they bring painful consequences with them.

So it’s helpful to survey the events that occur and the way life takes shape, moment to moment, day by day, week by week, year by year. What we’re experiencing is the flow of the natural order, and the extraordinary and miraculous thing is that within that natural order we have the capacity to make changes, to have an effect. We are able to choose, and this is what makes the possibility of liberation open to us. And when we make the choice to let go of self-centredness and move towards awakening, to let go of that which is destructive, obstructive and harmful, we can bring our hearts more and more completely into accord with that reality. In essence, what is being experienced is that the mind is becoming aware of its own nature and that it is part of the universe. And if the idea’s not too high-flown, in a way the universe is able to become aware of its own nature through our spiritual efforts.

I feel that this is an important principle to understand. It’s not as though the world and the universe are out there and we are separate and apart from them; no, rather we are intrinsically involved in them through what we do and what we are. When we see things in this way, we realize that our destiny, if you like to use that kind of language, is entirely in our own hands. What happens in the world now is the effect of everything that has happened before, from the Big Bang to the present. It’s totally pre-conditioned. But what we do with it now, how we handle it now, the attitude that we have towards it, is entirely a matter for us. That’s where the difference can be made.

We can’t find freedom through always having things the way that we’d like, as a) life is not that controllable for anyone, and b) the happiness that does come is necessarily transient. The Buddha’s advice is rather for us to exchange trying to find happiness through getting what we like, for learning how to find happiness through liking what we get – or at least not finding fault with it. If we can make that  shift  in  attitude and  learn  how  to  be  open  and  at  ease  with  what  we’ve  got, with  how  life  is,  then  we  can  find a  tremendous  quality  of harmony,  peacefulness  and  freedom.  There  is  the  vast  serene radiance  of upekkhā.