## 1 INTRODUCTION

As usual, whenever Buddhist teachings are presented, this teaching is given in the spirit of an offering for reflection and consideration, rather than being put forward as an absolute truth or something people are expected to believe or just take out of hand. Since the topic of this book is ‘superstition’ it’s worth re-stating this right at the very start. This subject – ‘Who is Pulling the Strings?’ – addresses our sense that something is in control of our life, that there are forces at work in the universe which pull the strings, as if we were being operated like puppets. But what are the forces which may be manipulating our lives, and how does all this work?

In ancient times, both in European culture and in other cultures all round the planet – Asia, Africa, Australia, the Americas – people had a somewhat animistic view of the world. When it was dry they’d think: ‘The rain gods are asleep,’ and when rain fell they’d think: ‘The rain gods have woken up and are delivering water for us.’ They’d talk of appeasing and serving the fire gods to keep on the right side of them. They would believe in spirits who ruled the thunder and lightning, the rivers, the trees and so on. That animistic world view is still very much part of our background, our cultural conditioning. The human perspective was, and in a way still is, to see the whole world as alive, as animated, with spirits living in everything and running everything. Even today many religious forms still function largely around keeping the gods happy: making sacrifices, performing acts or carrying out observances so as not to upset the rain gods, or so the fire gods won’t unleash themselves and burn your village down, so diseases won’t come or the river won‘t rise and wash you away in the night; or nowadays, ritual behaviours followed to keep your computer program running buglessly. Thinking in these terms seems very natural and common, so it’s interesting to consider how these beliefs and this perspective on the world has evolved over time.

As a result of this type of thinking we may also believe that the things we do, the choices we make, really have no effect in themselves. We may believe that our lives are not really in our hands, but in the charge of the forces, deities, programs or invisible beings who actually run everything. Even if we don‘t believe there is a fire god or a river god, we might still have very fixed ideas about karma. It’s very common in Buddhist or Hindu cultures, but also in the West where those cultures have had an influence, to relate to karma and the results of past actions and past lives as having a definitive effect on what we experience. Someone may think: ‘I have this illness because it’s my bad karma’; or ‘My son failed his exams because of bad karma from a past lifetime’; or: ‘I have horrible neighbours moving in next door because it’s my bad karma.’

Someone who recently visited the monastery asked how karma ripens: who decides when it ripens and what form it takes, and what the results of past actions will be. People quite commonly have a half-formed belief there are Gods of Karma, a kind of celestial committee, that sorts out exactly what the results of our actions should be, what lessons we are due to learn, or which of our debts need to be called in. They think there’s some kind of celestial accounting system run by invisible deities who say: ‘She gets fifteen points and he loses five, and she gets fifty because she’s doing really well, but he gets 150 – and that one is out of the game altogether.’ This somewhat mechanistic and deterministic view of kamma-vipāka, action and its results, is extremely common in the religious field, particularly in the Asian religious world, but also among Westerners, and it can be held in a very fixed way: ‘what goes around comes around.’

I‘m particularly surprised that people so often assume vipāka is always the result of action only in a past life. I ask them: ‘What about things you’ve done in this life? Aren’t they going to have some effect as well?’ It’s bizarre – especially since our everyday world keeps suggesting very strongly that the choices we make in this life matter a lot: choosing to leave that country; choosing to cheat in that exam; choosing to make that donation; choosing to marry that person… All national laws around the world, countless volumes of statutes, rest upon this principle but, despite this apparently substantial clue, there is an unconscious distancing that disempowers us from acknowledging the effects of recent choices and, more importantly, the capacity we have to make a difference now.

People have the feeling that somewhere in the remote past something was done which made some particular thing happen in this present life; that this is inescapable and there’s nothing they can do about it. That particular event, that illness, misfortune or difficulty, is the inevitable result of some personal action in a previous birth. I realize I’m making some sweeping generalizations here, but I think most people recognize some of these ideas. Maybe some of us still think that way, for example Shirley McLaine in her recent book ‘What If…’ (Simon and Schuster, 2014), speaking about the supposed past karma of Stephen Hawking that caused his disease or, more contentiously still, the karma of the victims of the Nazi regime that caused their horrific destruction.