## Preface

The title of this book refers to the image of the Buddha’s teaching, the Wheel of Truth (or Dhamma). It is a wheel that he set rolling in his first discourse by proclaiming the Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path of practice. This teaching remains as the axis of Ajahn Sumedho’s teaching and personal contemplative work. This particular collection of his Dhamma talks and dialogues is composed of material that has appeared in various newsletters and magazines before; it derives from different periods in Ajahn Sumedho’s teaching career, but it has been gathered into three parts to address overarching themes.

The first theme is one of foundation, of grounding the mind and its actions in the most fertile field for skilful states. It must be stressed that the theme of The Ground of the Dhamma is not an introductory piece that we master in year one and then leave behind, any more than the ability to stand upright and balanced is merely for infants. Although standing upright and balanced is the first piece we work on, reference to Refuge, to gratitude and to social responsibility are ongoing practices that sustain right view, without which the Dhamma gets lost in self-centredness.

Truth is an Open Door continues the presentation with various articles on meditation and wise reflection. The title refers to a quote from the suttas, ‘Open are the doors of the Deathless’, of which Ajahn Sumedho is particularly fond. In its Pali form this phrase became something he normally recited at the beginning of a Dhamma talk from the mid-1980s onwards, and its theme was the inspiration behind establishing Amaravati as a spiritual centre. His wish was that, for people of any or little faith, Amaravati would provide an opportunity to enquire into the direct experience of life. The collection Truth is an Open Door offers some of the standard Buddhist approaches to this penetrative enquiry, as well as more universal reflections and contemplations.

Being Awake is the final section and it gathers some of the many talks that Ajahn Sumedho gave (from the 1980s onwards) on awakening in the present. The aim of this theme is to shift the view of the meditator from the attitude of being someone who is striving towards a future attainment. The theme is not intended to negate the need for a Path (it takes time to have a sense of the timeless) but to clear the doubt and sense of inadequacy that comes from the ideas we have about ourselves as we practise. As Ajahn Sumedho often reminds us, as long as we approach the Dhamma from the idea of being someone, of using our personality as a vehicle for awakening, then a sense of inadequacy is bound to cast a shadow on our practice. It is for the elimination of this obstructive self-view that this teaching is given.

This selection ends with a conversation between Ajahn Sumedho and Jack Kornfield on the early years of their practice and their time with Ajahn Chah. As befits the book’s reference to the Wheel, we end where we begin – in a circle that keeps widening and deepening.

Bhikkhu Sucitto