## 9 NON-CONTENTION WITH MARA 5

The scriptures often show how the Buddha encountered Māra, the force of denial and death. Under the Bodhi tree his response to Māra’s threats, cajolings, temptations and attempts to cause doubts was not life-affirmation; nor did he go into deep jhāna and evade Māra, blast him with a vajra bolt, try to be reasonable and negotiate on Māra’s terms or justify himself. Instead his response was a fearless wakefulness. Almost invariably in the accounts of their meetings, as soon as he is aware of the malefactor’s presence, he just says: ‘I know you, Māra.’ And the game is over. These are myths, but they maintain their power because they correspond to truth as we experience it. When Māra knows that the Buddha has seen the trick, the hook inside the bait, he knows his intended victim is not going to bite. In that declaration of knowing, Māra is defeated. This suggests that the opposite to death is not birth, life-affirmation or even the destruction of death, but wakefulness.

Perhaps the most meaningful way of considering the encounters between the Buddha and Māra is to regard them as depicting the arising of unwholesome ego-based states in the mind of the Buddha, the instinctive fears, doubts and desires which arise in his mind but find no place to land there. Using the myth as a map of our own psyches, Māra also represents our own ego-death experiences (loneliness, anger, obsessiveness, greed, doubt, etc.). The Buddha’s example points to the most skilful way for the wisdom of our hearts to respond to them: by wakeful and radical non-contention. For as soon as we contend against death, we’ve bought into the value system and swallowed the hook. When we hate and fear death or want to swamp it with what we take to be life, Māra has won: ‘Such a one has gone over to Māra’s side and the Evil One can do with him as he likes’ (S 35.115).

Non-contention is not passivity, denial or switching off, dumbly suffering the slings and arrows as they thump into us, but a full awareness. The Buddha doesn’t say: ‘It’s all yours, Māra.’ Defeating Māra is the point, but he is defeated by not contending against him. One of the most often quoted passages of the Dhammapada states:

Hatred is never conquered by hatred.

Only by love is it conquered.

This is a law

ancient and inexhaustible.

(Dhp 5)

Also in such passages as:

Whatever states of being there are,

of any kind, anywhere,

all are impermanent, pain-haunted

and subject to change.

One who sees this as it is

thus abandons craving for existence,

without relishing non-existence.

The remainderless fading, cessation,

Nibbāna, comes with the utter ending of all craving.

When a bhikkhu reaches Nibbāna thus, through not clinging,

Then he will have no renewal of being;

Māra has been vanquished and the battle gained,

Since one such as he has outstripped all being.

(Ud 3.10, Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli, trans.)

So there is a conundrum: how can conquest be the aim if the fundamental attitude is non-contentious?

The Buddha was a warrior noble, a khattiya, by birth, but like Gandhi he sought victory by non-argument. Martial language and symbolism are often used in relationship to the Buddha, including such epithets for him as Jina (‘Conqueror’), but it is important to recognize that ‘conquest’ here does not entail a fight; more accurately, it means that ultimately reality has to outweigh illusion. As Māra once expressed himself after another frustrating encounter: ‘You might as well poke a rock with lily stems’ (S 4.25). Māra is frustrated even though the rock is not doing any contending.

This approach is of crucial importance and provides clear moral guidance, both in our day-to-day relations and interpersonal disputes, and in the context of international conflicts and wars. The Buddha was no stranger to war and politics, and his wise advice relates to those domains as much as to our internal worlds. Whether it’s ‘a reasonable hatred’ of the chattering mind, restlessness, doubts and sordid passions (backed up by quoting the Dhamma book that says: ‘Destroy greed, hatred and delusion’) or ‘a warranted hatred’ of ex-partners who have betrayed us, wielders of painful influence in our world about whom we are absolutely justified to be negative, or political leaders we love to decry – when there is commitment to any such urges, the hook has sunk right in.

In his famous ‘Simile of the Saw’ (M 21.20) the Buddha states: ‘Even if bandits were severing you limb from limb with a two- handled saw, if you gave rise to an attitude of hatred towards them, you would not be following my teaching.’ Instead he advocates being compassionate and wishing for the welfare of the abusers. The bar is thus set dauntingly high, but perhaps he used this extreme example deliberately to indicate that all hatred is intrinsically non-Dhammic, and that loving-kindness, mettā, is always possible. It’s important to recognize that mettā does not mean liking everything, but accepting that everything has its place in nature; it all belongs, the beautiful and the ugly. True benevolence is not dwelling in aversion, it is radical non- contention with all nature. It is natural enough to confuse the two, but mistakenly taking ‘loving’ to also mean ‘liking’ can cause a lot of problems.

An ancient Indian tale speaks of a cobra who becomes the disciple of a forest-dwelling rishi. Newly sworn to vegetarianism and pacifism, she had a rough time, especially when the village boys realized she would no longer strike or fight back when tormented. One day, with rumpled scales and broken fang, she went to see the holy one: ‘I have tried my very best to follow your teachings faithfully, but this is too much – one of those boys just picked me up by the tail, swung me round and tossed me up in a tree. This is the last straw. I take your teachings on non-violence very seriously, but one more incident like this and there’s going to be trouble.’

The holy man replied: ‘I deeply admire your commitment to the Path, dear one, and it’s true that I require non-violence of all my disciples, but I never told you that you couldn’t hiss.’

Thus fierceness, as mentioned above, is not necessarily equivalent to anger, likewise civil disobedience is not the same as being enraged. Similarly, we can have true kindness, acceptance of the way things are, without condoning a certain attitude, as if to say: ‘I love you completely, but your opinions are poisonous and deranged.’ In the cultural language of the West, ‘not hating’ often implies tacit approval. The eminent professor of linguistics at MIT, Noam Chomsky, once vigorously defended the right of a fascist politician to speak on campus. Though he had no sympathy for the man’s views, he also saw that to ban him from speaking was to show the same quality of prejudice as that attributed to fascists. To ‘serve truth, defy the lie’, as is proclaimed on the hooded sweatshirts of the Dharma Punx, is to allow the Dhamma to speak, not to start a fight.

As soon as we swallow Māra’s hook, even our efforts at practising the spiritual life can pull the heart away in the opposite direction. We want to do good, but we just seem to create more trouble. As Ajahn Mun’s ‘Ballad of Liberation from the Five Khandhas’ says:

Wanting what’s good, without stop:

That’s the cause of suffering.

It’s a great fault: the strong fear of bad.

‘Good’ and ‘bad’ are poisons to the mind,

like foods that inflame a high fever.

The Dhamma isn’t clear

because of our basic desire for good.

Desire for good, when it’s great,

drags the mind into turbulent thought

until the mind gets inflated with evil,

and all its defilements proliferate.

The greater the error, the more they flourish,

taking one further and further away

from the genuine Dhamma.

(Ven. Thanissaro, trans.)

Also, in the Verses of the Third Zen Patriarch:

When you try to stop activity to achieve passivity

your very effort fills you with activity.

(Richard B. Clarke, trans.)

The tragedy is that we make all these noble efforts: going on retreats, keeping Precepts, serving the Dhamma and so forth, but those efforts themselves can become an obstruction if handled wrongly, just as in the history of the Buddhist tradition, where over time the elder bhikkhus became the corpulent religious aristocracy and privileged priesthood the Buddha was so determinedly trying to counter. This initial drift, which occurred some 2,000 years ago, contributed to the Mahayana revolution and later to the cascade of other reforms and renewals that have occurred in the Buddhist world.

Our eagerness to destroy the ‘wrong’ in our minds creates more of the same pain and darkness. Like the attitude of wanting to destroy evil in the world, that righteous indignation which says: ‘I’m right, you’re wrong’ results in the aberrations illustrated in George Orwell’s ‘Animal Farm’; we become the very thing we are opposing. Another example is found in the story of the Grand Inquisitor in Dostoevsky’s ‘The Brothers Karamazov’; when the Messiah visits mediaeval Spain, the Inquisitor ends by condemning him so that he won’t disturb the progress of the Christian religion. We can eventually suppress the very thing we’re trying to further. The Inquisitor thought he was doing the right thing. That’s the painful irony: there are good intentions and fidelity to a system, but that contention against ‘bad, wrong, shouldn’t be’ is tragically destructive to the system’s originating spirit.

Solzhenitsyn once mused that it would be so easy if evil was an absolute and we could just isolate it and wipe it out, unfortunately: ‘The battleline between good and evil runs through the heart of every man.’ The Buddha’s teachings also indicate that there is no such thing as an absolute evil. According to Buddhist myth, Mahā-Moggallāna was Māra in at least one of his previous lives (M 50.8); that great saint, both fully enlightened and a chief disciple of the Buddha, had at one point been Satan, the Lord of Lies. Or there is the example of Aṅgulimāla, a mass murderer who became a disciple of the Buddha and an Arahant; and not only an Arahant, but also protector of expectant mothers and their babies. It is a beautiful irony that 2,500 years later, his verses are still chanted to impart blessings to pregnant women.

All this shows that we can never be irremediably lost. Even if we think these examples are just fairy stories, their symbol- ism alone is immensely powerful. It suggests that not only is any situation resolvable, but that anyone may end up as a saint, a benevolent, radiant presence in the universe, helping to liberate many other beings. When we line up our concerns about ‘my mind with its fears, insecurities and lusts’ against being Māra, and thus the embodiment of unwholesomeness in the universe, the degree of unskilfulness is incomparable. It therefore implies that no karmic entanglement is inescapable – so there’s hope for all of us!

But what are we to do when things are wrong? At any time many wars are being fought around the world. In many countries hundreds of thousands of people take to the streets in protest against oppressive regimes. Non-violent protest, civil disobedience and other kinds of useful mischief are fully valid means of expressing one’s commitment to Truth. Non-

contention is not submissiveness, capitulation or passivity; remember that the Buddha is famous for having taken the initiative to forestall a war between the Koliyans and the Sākyans over water rights to the Rohiṇī River (SN 4.15; Jāt 475).

So how to encounter Māra without being swept along by those forces or fighting against them? Firstly, we can use the principle of non-contention as a flag to indicate the arising of habits of contention (‘It shouldn’t be this way…’) and, feeling it in the body, reflect instead: ‘Oh, contention, look at that.’ Thus we respond by waking up, knowing and transcending. It is as if we invite the Buddha into the picture. And when Buddha- wisdom knows that state, what do we do? Move forwards? Back away? Be still? In each moment intuitive wisdom guides the heart: ‘Act now’; ‘Be quiet’; ‘Do not enter, wrong way’. The heart knows what to do. Sometimes Māra screams, demands reaction; the bait is very tasty, compelling, but with that same cool ease the Buddha never picks it up. There is utter poise: ‘I know what this is. I know you, Māra.’ Passion is there, but we’re not sucked in; the motive to be mindful is there but we don’t identify with it. This means a complete acceptance of the way things are, while in the same breath making efforts to cultivate wholesomeness and restrain unwholesomeness; i.e. right efforts are being made, but not with a dualistic attitude based on self-view. Our initiative to act compassionately is part of the way things are. Thus we work to establish wholesome objects of concentration, let go of anger, cultivate mettā, karuṇā, muditā and upekkhā but all embraced in an environment of non- grasping and non-contention.

The gesture of waking up is all it takes; when we respond to the death clamp on the heart, to ego-death, with wakefulness, the heart is freed. This is the Buddha’s response. When we encounter unwholesomeness, we don’t let the heart see it as an otherness which then needs to be destroyed. Furthermore, rather than merely tolerating negative qualities by observing them from a would-be remote, pseudo-supramundane vantage point, the Buddha advocates sharing blessings with the evil as well as the good:

‘May those who are friendly, indifferent or hostile,

May all beings receive the blessings of my life,

May they soon attain the threefold bliss

And realize the Deathless.’

That includes all abhorred world leaders and public figures, not to mention our miscreant ex-partners and poisonous mind- states; piling so-called ‘reasonable hatred’ upon them only multiplies the causes of pain and confusion.

The Buddha’s fundamental gesture is to be faithful to Reality: pure presence and absolute non-contention. The action or stillness which springs forth from that gesture will intrinsically embody the very best that can be.

5 This chapter has been previously published, in various forms and in a variety of publications, including in ‘Buddhadharma’, Spring, 2003.