## PREFACE

This small book is the first in a series of four, consisting of reflections and practices related to the ‘sublime abiding places for the heart’ – the four brahma-vihāras, in Buddhist parlance. They are also known as ‘the four immeasurables’ on account of the boundless quality of their nature.

The vision for the series is to explore these sublime abidings via the somewhat oblique approach of looking at their opposites. The four brahma-vihāras are listed, in the Buddhist scriptures, as:

Mettā – loving-kindness, benevolence, radical acceptance, non-aversion.

Karuṇā – compassion, empathy, appreciation of the suffering of others.

Muditā – sympathetic or altruistic joy, gladness at the good fortune of others.

Upekkhā – equanimity, caring even-mindedness, serenity amid all turbulence.

In this first book we will be investigating mettā through the lens of contention and self-righteousness; the declaration: ‘I’m right, you’re wrong!’ being an archetypical expression of these caustic qualities. The other three books in the series will, similarly, explore the remaining brahma-vihāras through aspects of mind and behaviour that oppose or confuse them.

The material published in this book is mostly based on some workshops that were given in the USA in the spring of 2010, at Spirit Rock Meditation Center, California, and at New York Insight, New York City.

As they were on those daylong workshops, and as with all teachings offered in the Buddhist tradition, the words here are presented for the reader’s contemplation rather than being intended to be taken as absolute truths. Those who pick this book up and read it are therefore encouraged to consider whether these principles and practices feel true to life and, if they do, to try them out and see if they bring benefit. Do they help you to deal with conflict, both inner and outer, more easily? Do they lead you to a recognition of the balance of the Middle Way? Do they help you to be a force of concord rather than one of polarization and antagonism? If so, that is to be rejoiced.

If, however, these words don’t help you, then may you discover other wholesome ways of finding peace with the struggles and contentions that are such a stressful part of our lives.