## 7 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question: I was curious about the ‘pressurized alienation’ that you talked about and the pressurizing of the heart. I understood the alienation part, the separateness, but I wanted to hear more about what you meant by it and how it pressurizes the heart, or how the process of conceptual proliferation leads to that.

Answer: It’s essentially to do with strengthening the sense of ‘I’; inflating the feeling of ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’. As that sense of self becomes stronger and more inflated, more real, that creates a feeling of alienation. The more the sense of self is let go of, the less there is that quality of separation and alienation. This reduces the causes of conflict, because the less of a fixed and solid ‘me’ there is, the less the feeling of a world ‘out there’ and ‘the other’ is created. So the tension of longing to get something from ‘the other’ or being in conflict with ‘the other’ dissolves. There isn’t really a subject/object separation, but when the mind hangs on to this fabricated perception which doesn’t match the reality, it creates a feeling of tension. There isn’t really a separate ‘me’ that’s completely independent from the rest of the world; that’s not the reality. Therefore, when the mind hangs on to that which is not real, it’s trying to hold an illusion together in the face of a different set of facts. It’s a non- sustainable picture of the world; it simply doesn’t apply, the world doesn’t work in that way. Two plus two does not equal five. But when we hang on to a sense of self and feel it as solid, the inflation of the feeling of ‘I’ creates alienation and loneliness. Seeing the ego and the sense of self as just a convenient fiction that we use to get through life takes away this rift between self and other, and the sense of stress or tension between them.

As it says in the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta:

With such conceptual proliferation as the source, the heart is beset with mental perceptions and notions characterized by the prolific tendency in respect to past, present, and future forms.

And when that comes to an end:

Then this is the end of resorting to weapons, quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malice and false speech. Here these harmful unwholesome states cease without remainder.

‘Beset’ is not a word we use often, but it conveys the quality of being surrounded by aggressive and unwelcome forces. When we invest in the sense of self and think we need to be stronger, we react to that feeling of pressure or being beset by the world and its problems by trying to tighten up, to protectourselves more. We become more anxious; we get closed circuit TV cameras to protect our home and more insurance, and we become more miserable. We seek protection because of the feeling of fear. We don’t realize that we can get to the very source of the fear and see what there is to be afraid of. When we see the reactions happening within us that create the causes of that fear, we can let go of that sense of self, of self-concern, and then we recognize clearly that there’s no one who’s afraid and nothing to be afraid of: Sabbe dhammā anattā: all dhammas, all things, are ‘not-self’.

Question: So the real object of the whole practice is to have no identification with self? Is that basically the bottom line?

Answer: Ideally. It’s to do with seeing through the feeling of self; like saying: ‘I am Ajahn Amaro,’ as long as I know that’s a convenient fiction, I’m fine. To my sisters I am not Ajahn Amaro, I’m their little brother. They know what to write on the envelope when they send me a card, but I’m not Ajahn Amaro to them. They’re my big sisters. They knew a different me. But for most of the world that’s a convenient handle to use. It’s a convenient way to get through life, but the more clearly we see through it, the more free we are from suffering. As the Buddha said:

‘I am’ is a conceiving. Conceiving is a disease. Conceiving is a tumour, a barb, a sharpened arrow. By overcoming all conceivings, bhikkhu, one is called a sage at peace. And the sage at peace is not born, does not age, does not die. They are not shaken and are not agitated. For there is nothing present in them by which they might be born. Not born, how could they age? Not ageing, how could they die? Not dying, how could they be shaken? Not being shaken, how could they be agitated?

Dhātuvibhanga Sutta (‘The Exposition on the Elements’) M 140.31

Question: But how do we find a way of not believing in that picture of ‘me’ – how we present ourselves and how we’re seen?

Answer: The Buddha said that what one is trying to do in this kind of spiritual practice, to truly liberate the heart, is the most difficult thing a human being can undertake. But it’s also the only real thing you can do. That’s a sweeping statement, but I believe it’s true. It’s also interesting that after his enlightenment the Buddha first thought there was no point trying to explain it to anybody. Not saying ‘yes’ to everything, but not saying ‘no’ to everything either: no entanglement with anything; how do you talk about that? What’s the language for it? It’s amazing that not only could the Buddha teach it to people in his own lifetime, but two and a half thousand years later we’re still fruitfully using the teachings he put together to try to explain the inexplicable.

The conundrum of ‘self’ is particularly tricky because it’s such an assumed reality. For four hundred years Western philosophy has been struggling to decide whether things are predetermined or if we have free will. But the Buddha’s approach was completely different. He asked: ‘Who is there to have free will or not? Who is deciding?’ Thus he turned the attention to our presumptions about the agent. Rather than trying to figure out whether I can truly decide anything, from first principles, we look at what this ‘I’ is. Is it genuinely a separate individual entity? We use meditation to direct attention onto the ‘self-feeling’ and explore it, and we see there is no ‘thing’ there. It’s like a conjuring trick. These different elements collected together create an illusion. It’s like seeing a few lines on a piece of paper and suddenly recognizing a horse. We say: ‘Oh, look, it’s a horse!’ in the same way we should say, ‘Oh, look, it’s a person,’ and not forget that this person is a fabricated reality. The word ‘person’ comes from the Latin persona, which means ‘mask’. Per means ‘through’, sona means ‘sound’. The persona is what sound goes through, so our persona is our mask to the world, and we see individual identity as a mask, a convenient fiction. But we still need to be able to function in the world, and that’s a difficult manoeuvre, because we need to keep track of both pleasant experiences and also unpleasant experiences, such as conflict.

When something happens that really pleases you, you need to be able to recognize that it’s just ‘liking’. In essence it’s no different from a pain in your knee. It’s just a feeling, just an endorphin flash. It’s a pleasure centre going off rather than a pain centre. You learn to develop perspective and space around your instinctive nature, the reptile brain areas of territoriality, procreation, aggression, feeding. These are all things to which the Precepts relate, they’re about violence, property, sexuality, communication, food, territory. The Precepts create space around those instinctive, non-verbal reactions by the amygdala and the reptile brain. Some of the most violent activities in nature are those of a mother protecting her offspring. The Mettā Sutta says:

Even as a mother protects with her life her child, her only child...

As I understand it, when males in the animal world fight they’re usually competing for hierarchy, and they generally just leave a few scars before backing off. But when a female is protecting her cubs, she’ll kill the attacker. These are powerful forces, and the kind of practice I’ve been describing gives a perspective on the activity of these root instinctive processes, where the feeling of self very quickly becomes embedded: ‘I’ am angry, ‘I’ want, ‘I’ am lustful, ‘I’ must have. Seeing through the sense of self and being able to experience those qualities directly means realizing: ‘This is just defensiveness’, ‘This is just aggression’, or ‘This is just fear.’ It’s not a personal problem. It’s not ‘mine’. It’s just a pattern of nature. This allows for an expansiveness, a spaciousness, around those reactions. A lot of what it allows is letting go of the sense of self. There’s space around ‘mine’, ‘me’ and ‘what I am’.

Question: How does an activist who wants justice and wants to fight for justice step back from the reptile brain reactions into the ‘response’ place?

Answer: Mindfully. It’s recognizing the feeling: ‘We need justice here. Now, where am I coming from in that attitude?’ Then we turn that reflective quality inwards and say: ‘Okay, this seems unfair and not right. Now, how am I holding that? Where is it in my heart? Where is that feeling coming from? Is it coming from a sense of wanting to benefit the “other” as well as myself? Is there an urge to punish? What’s there? What’s here?’ We try to be as clear and honest as we can. If you feel that you want the ‘other’ to suffer, you can’t just switch that feeling off. You note: ‘That’s the feeling that’s arisen and that’s where it’s coming from.’ And when you see where it’s coming from, don’t trust it. However, you can’t just decide: ‘From today onward I won’t feel angry’ or ‘I’ll stop being afraid. I’ve had it with fear.’ The one who does the deciding is not working for the same company as the one who is doing the fearing. The systems analyst is not in discussion with the tyrannosaurus: it’s a different language. Instead you acknowledge your reaction: ‘I recognize that I want that person to suffer. That’s what I’m feeling. Okay.’ And know that’s what’s there.

Bringing that quality of awareness to the feeling of the body is exactly the same thing, as in when bringing up a painful childhood memory, or a memory of being attacked or criticized. Maybe a memory is so painful and intense that you can’t really get anywhere near it, but that very awareness in itself is part of the balancing; it’s part of the righting process, of bringing things into attunement. You can ask your friends for help: ‘I think we need to do something about this situation, but I can’t get clear enough in my mind because I hate the person concerned, so can you give me some advice about what would be a good way forward? I don’t trust my own judgement.’ Doing that is not a weakness. It’s wisdom to call on your friends who haven’t got such a loaded view or biased perspective, and ask what they think. So you’re recognizing your own deludedness, but you’re not being passive or letting things run because of not wanting to act on your fear or anger, rather you’re drawing upon your reliable friends who can help.

Question: If I’m criticized once by someone, I don’t react but just try to stay clear. But when there’s criticism every time I am with that person, that means I’m exposing myself to this process. So I’ve followed some advice I was given, which was: if someone criticizes you and it resonates as true, you can bless the person because they gave you a jewel to learn from, a flaw that you need to improve on. But if it doesn’t resonate as true, you learn about that person, not about yourself. But when I see unskilful actions I just flick them away, I say: ‘I hear the advice:

“Be with what is, stay open”,’ but it’s not working. I have a hard time with that.

Answer: The very fact that you have to flick those actions away means that you’ve taken hold of them. I’m not saying you should be passive and go along with what everyone says or just agree with them, but if someone is, say, making some criticism and you want to push them away, that very sense of wanting to do so means you’ve already picked it up. So it’s a refinement of practice to say: ‘This person has a problem. Every time they see me they complain about such-and-such.’ If we really mean that, the person’s complaining is not bothersome to us. Instead it arouses a quality of compassion: ‘Poor guy. He can’t drop this thing, and when I come through the door it gets pasted onto me. But he’s carrying a difficult issue around. Poor fellow.’ So you develop a quality of compassion for the other person’s tight, miserable state, and rather than feeling that you’ve got to push them away, what arises is a quality of caring. You’re not just seeing them in terms of their behaviour to you, but receiving them in a broader way.

Another aspect is the need, firstly, to make friends with your own ‘I don’t want that!’ feelings. Once you have accepted those fully, then the compassion for the other comes more easily. Does that help?

Question: It does. It’s just that I have in mind the concept of noble friendship, and it seems noble friends are very hard to find. But I keep looking.

Answer: If someone is being very critical, you may eventually recognize that it’s the right time and place to respond: ‘He’s in such a miserable state. He just criticizes and complains. How painful for him.’ So you find the right words and say: ‘Do you realize that every time you see me you’re complaining about this and that? Doesn’t that amount of negativity seem painful to you?’ Maybe such a moment of giving direct feedback never arises, but once in a while it can happen, and then that quality of compassion encourages us to communicate our perception of their complaining. You’re not trying to get even with the complainer, or punish them or push them away. You’re saying:

‘I care about you. What an uncomfortable place your mind must be in, that you see all these things to criticize and that’s what you choose to speak about. How painful!’ If no moment opens up to say that, you leave it alone. If a suitable moment does come, however, it’s a kindness to offer that kind of a reflection.

‘Do you realize that whenever you see me, this is what you say?’

If you wait until it’s genuinely for their benefit the message will get through, even if initially they become defensive or brush you off. If you’re acting from genuine kindness, at some unguarded moment they’ll realize you were right. That’s my experience. Sometimes it can be years later. Every so often I get a card from someone saying: ‘You probably don’t remember this, but seven years ago during a retreat I said this to you and your response made me very angry and upset, and I left the retreat, but I didn’t forget. And now I want to say thank you for saying that.’ If we are patient, and we wait for the right moment and see that we’re genuinely acting for the benefit of the other, that’s the best that we can do with a situation like that.

Question: I enjoy the teachings of Buddhism and try to practise it, but I come to a kind of wall. We say that the ending of desire is enlightenment, that we shouldn’t live in the world of duality, of opposites and we should look at ‘good and evil’ in a different way. How do we apply that to the real world? How can I utilize those teachings in my job or somewhere in the real world, not just in nature where it’s a little easier?

Answer: It’s a matter of recognizing the structures and conventions of our lives. For example, driving on the right-hand side is not an absolute good, it’s just the convention in most countries. The more you believe in a desire, the more clearly you’ll recognize when it doesn’t make you happy, and you’ll see that the disappointment is directly proportional to the expectation. So you don’t try to be totally desireless or just switch yourself off as a personality. You see that if you believe in those things as absolute truths, you create problems for yourself. You might feel angry towards someone and say: ‘If that person didn’t exist I would be happy!’ But you don’t have to think that very long before realizing that if the person didn’t exist, you might find something else to get upset about. So functioning in the so-called ‘real world’ is recognizing those different perceptions and opinions, the conventions that we use. Driving on the left or the right, what something’s worth: those are just society’s fictions that we use to get through a day and to function as a human group. And if we hold them lightly in that way, if we loosen our grip on the world, rather than it becoming ‘less real’, we mysteriously find ourselves more totally at home with it. If you love the world completely, you let go of it. The more tightly you hold on to it and want to keep and own it, the more alienation you create between yourself and it.

That’s the principle of letting go or non-attachment; you’re not trying to nullify your life and your feelings out of a dismissal of the world. Rather, ironically and mysteriously, when you let go of the world you find yourself at home in it. That’s the human drama. You still have all your desires and ambitions, but you don’t grasp them. I’ve just been told that two hundred and thirty three people have signed up for my next meditation day. That’s a lot! On one level I don’t care. I’d be happy to teach just six people. But in my habitual thinking patterns around making teachings available for the public, if a couple of hundred people show up, something says, ‘I scored a point!’ It’s ridiculous on one level, but we get conditioned to these ways of functioning, even though they don’t mean anything really. If the football team I used to support scores seven goals against a rival, in the great scheme of things it doesn’t matter. But something in me remembers my childhood allegiance to that team and thinks: ‘Seven goals to one – that was great!’ If you’re promoted there’s a flush of success, if you’re laid off there’s heartbreak or resentment. There’s the feeling of happiness when everyone shows up for a teaching, or the feeling of pain when people start leaving or falling asleep. It’s ridiculous. But that’s the flow of the human tragi-comedy and, when we see that this is the pattern of our lives, we learn what we can from that flow of events and feelings.