## 8 WHY AM I DOING THIS TO MYSELF?

We all have a tendency to take sides and to leap to conclusions, which manifests in different ways in our lives. There was a recent example of this in the Thai Forest tradition, concerning bhikkhuni ordination. Our authorities in Thailand don’t recognize the validity of full ordination for women. They argue that the bhikkhuni ordination died out in Sri Lanka with the last recorded nuns of the classical era about a thousand years ago, while Buddhism only came to Thailand about eight hundred years ago. According to the monastic rule, nuns must be ordained by other nuns, so the view of the Thai authorities is that as the bhikkhuni lineage had died out before Buddhism came to Thailand, therefore it ‘can’t be reinstituted’.

In fact the Theravada lineage of nuns was taken to China in the fifth century. In 432 CE a group of nuns were invited from Sri Lanka by the Chinese emperor on account of Chinese women who were interested in being ordained as nuns. They landed at Nanking and ordinations were carried out. Thus the lineage of nuns in China, bhikshunis, sprang from a Sri Lankan root. Their history through the centuries has been recorded in detail: from the names of the nuns who came from Sri Lanka, where and when their ship landed and the name of its captain, and the full lineage of nuns, the preceptors, and so forth from that time on. So, many women in the Theravada world who want to become bhikkhunis take ordination in the Chinese or Korean lineages, whose origins are the same, and then establish themselves under the Theravadan flag. They argue that although they took their ordination from China, it originally came from Sri Lanka. It just did a little detour for 1500 years. That lineage through China is not recognized as valid in Thailand, but one of the four different nikāyas or lineages in Sri Lanka does recognize it, so Sri Lankan women, and also women from Thailand, Burma and Western women, have received full ordination as bhikkhunis, those in Sri Lanka, mostly at a place called Dambulla, the Caves of Light. There are now several hundred bhikkhunis in Sri Lanka, all as I understand it in just one of those four lineages.

In Australia there was a lot of interest in full ordination for women, and Ajahn Brahmavaṁso, the abbot of Bodhinyana Monastery in Western Australia (who originally trained with Ajahn Chah and is a popular teacher) decided to go ahead with an ordination of four women. Our community functions very much as a global family, so this decision amounted to taking a big step outside our group agreements. There are different opinions as to whether our other branch monasteries were or weren’t asked about the matter, but many people in many different places felt they hadn’t been consulted. (There are some 300 branch monasteries, about twenty in the West and the rest in Thailand, so a lot of different people were involved). So there seemed to have been very little consultation and very little advance warning of the ordination but, nevertheless, it went ahead. Ajahn Brahm oversaw it, and Ayya Tathāloka, who had been a fully ordained nun in the Korean tradition for many years but had recently switched to being Theravadan, acted as the preceptor for the nuns who were being ordained. It was all very well intentioned. Ajahn Brahm felt that things were stuck in the Thai tradition and this was a good way to move them forward. He thought that offering equal opportunity for women in ordination was completely appropriate and suitable.

Unfortunately the results of going ahead with the ordination aroused a huge amount conflict in and around our monastic community, including vast amounts of traffic over the internet, blogs, emails, petitions and so forth. And to cite the theme of this teaching, there was a tremendous amount of ‘I’m right, you’re wrong’. All those who supported the ordination had their reasons for believing they were right, and all those who opposed it, or said it was not valid or shouldn’t have been done in that way, also had their reasons for doing so. This was extremely disheartening. These were all good, well- intentioned people, but on all sides, across all shades of the spectrum, people tended to adopt their position, make a case for it and then set up an opposition against ‘the other’. The Theravada monastic world is really a very small part of the grander scheme of things, but within our own sphere and for those interested in Buddhist practice, this event has affected many of our lives very strongly.

So it seems worthwhile to examine how, when we take hold of a fixed view, a fixed position, our opposition to ‘the other’ who disagrees with that position can become a force which obscures the real issues, making us unable to see them in a broad, helpful or effective way. It’s very hard to see the other person’s point of view if we’re convinced of our ‘rightness’. Words like ‘right’, ‘rightness’ and ‘actually’ are loaded. They have great power. Notice how many times in a day you use the words: ‘Well, actually ...’, meaning: ‘This is the real truth, the real real truth’.

But what’s more important is to learn to work with our own points of view and see them in a context, rather than just arguing about who’s right and who’s wrong, or supporting one side and creating a sense of alienation from the other. In the controversy over the ordinations in Australia, the male members of Ajahn Chah’s lineage who were not enthusiastic about the ceremony suddenly found themselves viewed by some people as evil patriarchal misogynists. But all of us find ourselves in these polarized positions sometimes – for example, which partner of a divorcing couple do you side with when both are dear to you? – though, in a sense, whether we’re polarized or not is ultimately up to us. By learning to understand how the mind relates to opinions, we learn how to relate skilfully to these difficult situations, moral conundrums and struggles throughout our lives.

How does it feel to be criticized, attacked, misunderstood, misrepresented?

There’s a well-known teaching in the Saṁyutta Nikāya, the Connected Discourses, about Akkosaka Bharadvāja (S 7.2), whose name means ‘Bharadvāja the Abusive’. He had heard that another member of the Bharadvāja brahmin clan had been ordained as a monk and joined the Buddha’s community:

‘Angry and displeased, he approached the Blessed One and abused and reviled him with rude, harsh words.’ The Buddha listened to this verbal attack and then said:

‘Bharadvāja, may I ask you a question?’

‘Yes!’

‘Is it the case that sometimes friends or relatives come and visit you?’

‘Yes, of course! I’m a householder, I have an ordinary family life. Of course people come and visit me! Why?’

‘Well, if you have people come and visit you, family or friends, is it your custom to offer them some refreshments, something to drink, some food or a snack when they come to see you?’

‘Well, of course it is! It’s a normal, civilized, polite thing to do!’

‘When you offer them this refreshment, if they decline to accept it, to whom does it belong?’

‘Well if they haven’t accepted it, it’s still mine, of course! Why do you ask?’

‘Well, brahmin, you offer me your anger. I don’t accept it. It still belongs to you, brahmin. It still belongs to you.’

Akkosaka Bharadvāja wasn’t pleased with this reply at first, but then the Buddha added the following spontaneous verses:

One who repays an angry person with anger

thereby makes things worse for themselves.

Not repaying an angry person with anger,

One wins a battle hard to win.

One practises for the welfare of both,

One’s own and the other’s

When, knowing that the other is angry,

One mindfully maintains one’s peace.

At that Bharadvāja the Abusive not only apologized but asked for ordination, and eventually he became an Arahant. It’s important to remember that one can be, as Ajahn Chah said to Ajahn Sumedho: ‘Right in fact, but wrong in Dhamma’. That’s a very helpful principle to take in: we can be right in fact, have any number of good reasons, but be wrong in Dhamma.

Similarly, when someone attacks us as Bharadvāja the Abusive attacked the Buddha, we feel defensive and the mind comes up with things to protect itself with, such as the ‘yes, but’ list. We prepare our retaliation and the reasons why they are wrong. When someone attacks us, we instinctively pick up that person’s mood and react by trying to defend ourselves, push them away or we shut down. Differently, in this exchange between the Buddha and Akkosaka, when Akkosaka verbally attacks the Buddha, the Buddha doesn’t react in that way. It’s as if someone offered you a dish of food but you just said: ‘Fine, but I am not hungry, I have no need of anything. And that’s a nice dish you’ve got there,’ recognizing that it’s theirs and that you have no obligation to receive it.

Or perhaps you’re very excited about something and try to share it with someone else who has absolutely no interest in the matter, and who is not swept up in your enthusiasm. What happens then is that your emotion, your excitement, is deflated. Similarly, the Buddha’s reaction to Bharadvāja the Abusive’s angry attack is just to say: ‘That’s your state. You’re excited. You’re upset about this. I don’t have to pick that up.’

To manifest care and kindness you don’t have to pick up the other person’s state. Sometime we can feel that: ‘I will be being rude if I don’t confirm my friend in their joy/sorrow/ indignation etc.’ So we end up adopting their mood even though we had no strong feeling beforehand. Alternatively, it might be the other person who puts out the same unspoken message: ‘You don’t care about me! If you did you would be as angry as I am.’

To practise deep kindness and radical acceptance, you acknowledge, at least internally, that this is the state they are in and that you are not obliged to feel that too. You don’t shut them out. You’re not saying: ‘I don’t care.’ Rather you recognize that don’t have to take part in that state of mind. You can choose whether to join in another person’s state of mind or not. Normally we don’t realize this; for some peculiar reason we feel as if we’re obliged to join in someone else’s excitement, outrage or anger. Somehow it’s what we’re ‘supposed’ to do. But I suggest there isn’t really a ‘supposed to’. It’s more a question of recognizing the state the other person is in and deciding whether we want to join in or not: ‘Would that be helpful, beautiful, useful?’ Or do I want to join their state on the terms in which it’s being offered?

In terms of my own character I’m the sort of person who would immediately empathize with another person’s mood and join in. Then a while later I would think: ‘Why am I so excited about this? I don’t really care,’ or ‘Why am I defending myself? What this person’s upset about really isn’t anything to do with me.’ I would only recognize later that I didn’t have to react in that way, but had done so out of a wish to empathize or a misguided sense of wanting to be supportive, to be connected to or not reject the person. That’s a very common feeling, a common chemistry. We join in with someone else’s mood because we feel that we have to, or solely out of habit.

Thus in learning to work with grasping – taking hold of opinions and views – we can learn to receive, accept and acknowledge another person’s mood, to know and be aware of it, but recognize in addition that we have a choice, a bridge we may or may not cross: ‘Do we choose to join in with that person’s mood or to leave it alone?’ It’s very helpful in these situations to develop body awareness, using our physical sensations. It’s the same when someone upsets you or you’re irritated by someone, or when you’re being attacked, criticized, misunderstood, misrepresented. These are prime opportunities for practice.

It takes a lot to be mindfully misunderstood or misrepresented, because you want to jump in and say: ‘No! It wasn’t like that! That’s not what I think. I’m not that way. I didn’t do that. It wasn’t me. No! You don’t understand!’ But as I believe Confucius put it: ‘Those who justify themselves do not convince.’ The very energy of self-justification feeds that same kind of contention.

We can use physical awareness when we’re attacked, when we are being mistreated or misunderstood. Rather than letting the mind go into verbal reactions or some kind of escape strategy, we can instead bring the attention into the body and feel: ‘What’s it like, this sense that I’m being attacked?’ The attacker doesn’t need to be present; you can do this when reading an email in which someone attacks you, or criticism of you or your community, or when you hear criticism through a third party. Rather than letting the mind buy into that self- justification, that spluttering, self-affirming habit, come back into the body and ask: ‘Where do I feel that? What’s it like? What’s its texture? What’s its position? What’s the place in the body where I feel that sense of indignation, fear or threat?’ It’s very helpful to explore where in the body we feel these different emotional states and then to develop mindfulness of the body, bringing the attention to that part of the body and fully knowing that feeling of being frightened, under pressure or criticized. I should stress that when we look at the physical sensation of this kind of emotion, when we allow ourselves to feel it, it’s not pleasant, so we habitually try to get away from it by telling a story or burning off the energy somehow. But when we focus the attention on it and let ourselves feel that fear in the belly, the breathlessness, the choking in the throat or the dagger between the shoulder blades, my experience has been that it isn’t that bad.

It’s not as painful as a migraine headache or a toothache. It’s uncomfortable, but it’s only like being out in a cold wind or having a small discomfort like a twinge in the knee. The urgency with which we try to get away from that feeling far outweighs the felt experience of the discomfort. So working with a painful feeling has a lot to do with engendering loving-kindness towards it. That doesn’t mean trying to like it, but recognizing that this is what it’s like when we’re outraged, upset or feeling grief. We bring the attention to it and have loving-kindness for it, a clear, open-hearted acceptance of the feeling of grief, threat, falling apart.

But then… to stay with it is really difficult.

The most difficult thing is not to do anything with it, because we immediately jump into thinking: ‘It’s an unpleasant feeling. How do I get rid of it?’ That’s the immediate reaction, and that urgency to ‘get rid of’ creates the causes for the feeling to be intensified, and made stronger and more real. This is because the mind is saying: ‘This is a real thing that is in the way. If I got rid of it I would be happy.’ Reasonable enough, in theory, but when we act on that reaction we intensify the causes of the feeling. Instead, we can go to the feeling and let it be known:

‘This is the cramp in the belly, this is the tightness in the throat, this is the knife between the shoulder blades. It feels like this.’

That very open acceptance of it as it is, without trying to ‘do’ anything with it, that very act of awareness, is the transforming agent. When those feelings, those painful sensations are held with a genuine, open, unbiased awareness, that’s when letting go, genuine relaxation can begin. It’s a relaxation based not on trying to get rid of, but on recognizing: ‘Why am I doing this to myself? Why do I hate this? Why do I fear this? Why am I tensing up against this? This is hard work.’ It’s a non- conceptual realization. A little intuition murmurs: ‘Why am I doing this to myself? I don’t have to do this. Lighten up.’ And the system softens on its own. The quality of awareness itself is like a heat lamp on a knotted muscle. After a while there’s a sense of ease which is hard to put into words but I think we all know that quality of softening. We learn to trust that quality of awareness, letting it rest on the place of tension, the place of discomfort, and we stay with it, letting the presence of loving, attentive awareness loosen the tension. Then we see for ourselves that this is another way of tracing back the radiance; it’s a way of coming back to the source and realizing: ‘It’s really not that big a thing. It’s just a feeling. Why do I do this to myself?’ And then we relax.