## 6 IT’S NOT MAGIC

To reiterate: the main teaching on conceptual proliferation or papañca, the process where the mind runs away and how that happens, is in Sutta 18 of the Majjhima Nikāya, the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta. The sequence begins with a sense-contact: there’s a physical sensation or a thought floats into the mind. That contact leads to feeling, vedanā, which in Buddhism is not an emotion, but more like the raw attraction of the pleasant, the repulsion of the painful or a neutral feeling. Feeling leads to saññā, perception, the designation or naming of the sense object, such as the cognizing of a colour as ‘red’. Then saññā leads to vitakka, thinking. There’s an initial thought, a brief conceptual framing of the experience: ‘That’s a really ugly red.’ and vitakka leads to conceptual proliferation: ‘Why did they use that ghastly red? I don’t like it. They should consult proper people before they ... blah blah blah ...’ This is papañca; the mind starts to run and get carried away with itself. In Gujarati papañca also means a contortion or cunning, the way in which things become distorted. That’s a very helpful way of describing it: distorted thinking, that kind of on-flowing, on-going chattering.

As papañca blossoms it strengthens into a sense of ‘me’ here, in a separate state from ‘the world out there’, which may be the world of a conceptual past, an abstracted present or an imagined future. But it entails a subject here and a separate object there, and a sense of stress or tension or pressure between them, such as longing for something you haven’t got or irritation with something that’s painful. When it’s at its full strength, it’s called in Pali papañca-saññā-sankhā, ‘the full range of conceptions and notions characterized by proliferation that beset and pressurize the heart’; in other words, ‘me’ in a state of tension with ‘the world’.

The more familiar you become with those different stages: contact, feeling, perception, thinking, conceptual proliferation and then the quality of pressurized alienation, with the mind obsessed and burdened by conceptions and notions, the more easily you can trace them back to their source. You can trace the mind’s outgoing energy back to its origin, or trace back the emotion in the body to see where it comes from, and how it blows up and can also fade away. The meditation exercises given here aim to create a sense of spaciousness around an emotion, an environment of non-entanglement, so that there’s a context for it. When an emotional state in or around you is surrounded by spaciousness, you see the state within that context. That’s the essence of responsiveness, the spaciousness that says: ‘That’s a strong feeling! What do I do with it?’ or ‘I don’t know what to do with this person who is having a breakdown in my company.’ This is the uncomfortable ‘I don’t know what to do with this’ feeling. It’s not a matter of shutting your heart down, of building a wall between ‘you’ and ‘the other’; it’s an openness to what’s here but a non-entanglement with it. It’s an unentangled participation in that experience, an engagement, but not with any entangled or distorted, contorted quality.

The question that comes up then is how to decide what is the right thing to do. In my humble opinion, ‘the right thing’ is a dangerous concept. The very phrase carries the presumption that there is a single perfect ‘right thing’ to do, a path in life that you’re supposed to be following; the ‘it’s meant to be’ delusion. I would like to suggest that there is no one ‘right thing to do’; it changes second by second, moment by moment, and is entirely dependent on mindful attunement to the present moment.

Sometimes the steps on the Noble Eightfold Path (customarily translated, for example as: Sammā-diṭṭhi = Right View, Sammā- sankappa = Right Intention, Sammā-vācā = Right Speech) are called Wise View, Wise Intention, Wise Speech, etc. because translating Sammā as ‘right’ may feel politically incorrect. In essence Sammā doesn’t mean ‘wise’, but we don’t like to talk about ‘right and wrong’ because we don’t want to judge, to divide things or people into right and wrong.

But the Sammā of the Eightfold Path is not the ‘right’ that is opposed to ‘wrong’. Sammā doesn’t really mean that kind of rightness. It means ‘right’ as in ‘upright’; it means ‘balanced’. As it says in one of Ven. Thanissaro’s books, ‘Wings to Awakening’:

[A]ny path of practice deviating from these systems [the 37 bodhipakkhiya-dhammas, or ‘conditions pertaining to enlightenment’] would be like an instrument tuned to a discordant scale, and would not be in harmony with the way of the contemplative (samaṇa) who aims at a life in tune (sama) with the Dhamma.

‘Wings to Awakening’, p 32

A second point is that the musical analogy makes vivid the need for balance in meditative practice, a lesson that appears repeatedly in the texts:

Just as a musical instrument should neither be too sharp nor too flat, the mind on the path has to find a balance between excessive energy and excessive stillness. At the same time, it must constantly watch out for the tendency for its energy to slacken in the same way that stringed instruments tend to go flat. The ‘rightness’ of right view and other factors of the path thus carries the connotation not only of being correct, but also of being ‘just right’.

‘Wings to Awakening’, p 37

If we pick up on this association we can say that the rightness of Right View also means Attuned View, so too Attuned Intention, Attuned Speech etc., which tells a different story. Doing the ‘right’ thing is not doing what is correct rather than what’s incorrect; it’s doing that which is ‘righted’, that which is in tune with the present moment. It is being attuned to the situation, to what is needed in any one particular moment, what is most beneficial for us and those we live with, and for handling emotional conflicts, or judgements or opinions. This understanding of attunement is really the essence of mettā, that loving-kindness which manifests as a radical acceptance, and also of sati-sampajañña, mindfulness and clear comprehension; mettā, sati and paññā – kindness, mindfulness and wisdom – are the heart of that benevolent attuning. It depends a lot on listening, on being open to what we are experiencing, the feelings within ourselves or from outside, and making space for them.

Thus the guide for action in terms of how we adapt, how we know we’re attuned, depends largely on mindfulness and paying attention. But we also need to let go of the idea of ‘the right thing’, some special thing like the path we ‘should’ be following or the ‘right’ meditation method. The essential element of this kind of attunement is to recognize that at any one moment we have an infinity of choices. Some choices we make lead to a painful result, some lead to a neutral result, some lead to a pleasant result. If we make a choice that leads to a painful result, even though it’s painful we may learn a lot from it – or it may be just painful. Similarly, we can have a pleasant result, but depending on how we handle that success or goodness we may make it into something monstrous, so that it may just bring a lot more difficulty for us. Thus the relishing of a beautiful state of meditation may become a cause of deep depression and disappointment for the next ten years while you try to get back the beautiful, blissful experience of that sitting, because you’re wrongly grasping that pleasant result.

Rather than thinking in terms of the right thing and the wrong thing, then, we make our choices as best we can, based on attunement instead of thinking there’s some sort of mysterious path already laid out for us – like a golden wire buried in the ground that we only have to find and then we can follow it to our destined happily-ever-after. Rather we make the choice that seems likely to lead to the most favourable result and then we see what happens. If there’s a pleasant result, we consider how to take this goodness, and use it well, without causing trouble for ourselves or others. If things go badly, we consider what we can learn from that: ‘What can this painful result teach me? What can I learn from it? What does it say about where to go in the future?’ So when someone is attacking us or we are critical of someone’s behaviour, but we stay quiet, we see and know the result of that for ourselves. Or we react fiercely and see how that works. Whatever the results are, we watch, we learn, we plough them back into our experience and they guide us for the future.

More specific help on what to do or how to choose is found in the Five Precepts, the basic format for human conduct: not to take life; not to steal or misappropriate things that don’t belong to you; not to engage in sexual misconduct, but to be respectful towards your own relationships and those of others; not to lie, deceive or use harsh or false speech in any way; and to avoid intoxicants that cause confusion. This is the format for a peaceful and contented life. The Five Precepts set out clear parameters; they give you a broad framework within which to use this kind of exploratory approach and ways of handling our perspectives, the opinions and views that arise within us, the way we see human situations. And when we look at the consequences of our actions, over and over again we find that the more we respond reflectively it leads to positive results, and when we react impulsively it yields negative ones. We use this comparing process like a tuning fork to measure our pitch and with the resultant attunement we feel more at ease and content. The people around us tend to be happier and more comfortable too, and we find that life has a very fluid and open quality to it.

I once met a Wall Street lawyer who had started practising meditation some half a dozen years previously. She said: ‘Until I started to meditate it was one conflict after another, and life was one ongoing struggle. But since I began meditating my relationships have become much more easeful, and my working situation is more relaxed, though I’m still working with the same company and I live with the same people.’ It was as if she thought: ‘This magical visitation has come into my life and taken all my troubles away!’ I said: ‘This isn’t really very magical. It’s more like: you used to get from one room to another by smashing yourself against the wall until you broke through it, and then suddenly you noticed that it’s much easier to go through the doorway. It’s not magic, it’s noticing where the gaps are and aiming for them, rather than just putting your head down and pounding with it until the wall breaks or you fall down unconscious.’ I think she was a little startled, perhaps because she had some internal story about how the devas were helping her and how magical things were. But often when we apply plain ol’ mindfulness and activate this capacity to be spacious, to see things in context, they open up. Life becomes a lot more easeful and we can find ways to deal with the conflicts, difficulties and apparently intractable situations that we face. We find ways to work with them that surprise us. It can seem to be miraculous but it’s often merely a matter of mettā – allowing more spaciousness, a radical acceptance based upon a quality of listening, into the mixture.