## 3 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question: Ajahn, how would you handle that dilemma with the ‘problem’ monk?

Answer: If it was me? Well, in a perfect world I would have found one of the other senior monks prior to the meeting, and taken a few minutes to say: ‘I feel pretty critical of this monk’s behaviour, and he seems to be out of order and upsetting many people. This looks really inappropriate to me, but Luang Por doesn’t seem to be saying anything about it. Is there some sort of reason? Could you throw some light on that?’ I’d seek a bit more background. Or I’d even have found time to talk to Ajahn Chah when there weren’t many other people around, so it didn’t become a public display. It was hard to catch Luang Por Chah alone though; there was no such thing as a private interview with him. He would receive people under his hut, and anybody and everybody who wanted to show up did. So it was hard to find a time alone with him, but occasionally if you were patient you could. Then I could have said: ‘Luang Por, I find a lot of my defilements are coming up around this monk. I’m noticing a lot of aversion and indignation, and I really feel I’m right to criticize him, but I notice that you’re not saying anything. Can I ask you to let me know why that is? What’s your perspective?’

Question: I was noticing when thoughts began and trying to track them back. They were just coming out of nowhere, not necessarily from a body sensation or anything like that. It was just like a little bubble and I couldn’t really catch the moment when the story arose. And it wasn’t just one word, it was a whole sentence.

Answer: Well that in itself is revealing, I find. Sometimes it’s quite tricky to try to do this as a particular exercise, because when you’re alert and watching, the chemistry doesn’t work in quite the same way. Sometimes we all can find that the mind is lost in a big story which began with some random bubble, not associated with anything of any significance. But you still find yourself really excited about this or irritated about that, or frightened by the other. It seems very real and you’re caught in the story, but it began with some random firing of the memory process and so it’s based on nothing very much.

Question: So it doesn’t have to be based on a sense-contact?

Answer: Not particularly. Well, ‘thought’ is a sense-contact; that’s the sixth sense, the mind. And dhammā, mental phenomena, are the objects. So that is an arising of a sense object. But I always find it very revealing when it’s àpropos of absolutely nothing; when it comes out of nowhere, merely the random firing of a human body and mind, and yet it turns into a long chain of proliferation. There wasn’t even a story, it was an almost completely random event. There was only a tiny spark, but it still caught some fuel, and took off and came alive on its own.

The more we recognize that process of conceptual proliferation and realize how insubstantial it is, the more we can create a clear context for it: ‘This is based on nothing very much. It doesn’t really have a root or a source. It’s just the mind’s fabrication.’

Question: Going back to the story about the monk, if someone is harming others, when, how and where is the red line? How long do you let them do what they’re doing?

Answer: That’s the big issue, isn’t it? I’m not saying that every action is inappropriate. What matters is how we handle a situation. We learn how to respond appropriately. If someone is harming others, instead of jumping in with an immediate reaction you establish a breadth of vision. This an important distinction that I like to make: ‘to react’ I take as meaning to blindly and impulsively follow the immediate effect of something seen or heard, sensed or thought – chasing the liked and rejecting the disliked; ‘to respond’ I take to mean consciously attending to the same sensory stimulus and then mindfully reflecting on the feeling of like, dislike or neutral feeling. You open your mind to the situation: ‘This seems to be really wrong. Now, what can be done to help?’ This is a quality called sati-sampajañña, which means ‘mindfulness and clear comprehension’ or ‘clear awareness’. You pay attention to both the object and the context within which it appears, ‘practising Dhamma in accordance with Dhamma’. ‘I can see it’s appropriate to take some action here. Now, what is going to be effective?’ And then you bring in qualities of perception: you see how things are, you use your experience of what has happened in the past, other people’s characters, their personality traits and so on. This practice I am describing is not about encouraging a passivity that is stupid; that would be grasping the Dhamma wrongly.

In addition, don’t forget what I said earlier about how: ‘The issue is complicated by the fact that sometimes stepping up and taking action may be exactly the appropriate thing to do, even though you are feeling righteously indignant.’ In those cases you have to quietly park your own feelings and consider the situation more broadly, then act based upon that. To not act because you’re feeling angry can be almost as big a mistake as to act because you are.

Question: So it’s more ‘how’?

Answer: It’s all to do with ‘how’, and that comes out of real attunement, mindfulness of a situation.

It’s not ‘taking action’ that’s the problem. It’s not even ‘opinions’ that are the problem. It’s clinging to them and taking the feeling of rightness to be an absolute truth, and therefore that anything we do based on it is good.

In Christianity an extreme version of this is called the antinomian heresy, i.e. thinking that anything done in the name of Jesus is thereby good. Nor is it confined to Christian theological thinking; it’s also the basis of going to war: ‘We’re the good guys, so we must be right, so anything we do to the bad guys is justified.’ But if we take a circumspect view, being mindful of the whole situation and letting ourselves be guided by that, and if our action and intentions come from our own sense of what’s appropriate, there can be a good result.

Question: The big-mouthed monk could have followed the same process. Instead of reacting by leaving the monastery, he could have stayed. So doesn’t it work both ways in any situation?

Answer: But I can’t control what you do, I can only have control over what I do.

Question: If he had been skilful, he would have seen his reaction and realized that maybe it started from a physical sensation of fear, and therefore that he should not buy into the whole story.

Answer: But culturally in Thailand, being shamed in front of people, someone confronting you and shaming you, is absolutely the worst thing.

Question: I’ve been exploring the question, ‘Is there a skilful use of anger?’, as I’ve heard that there’s a skilful use of fear. Fear can be skilful.

Answer: Yes, it stops us getting run over by traffic.

Question: So I was wondering if it’s the same with anger. I remember reading that Dipa Ma says:3 ‘No! Absolutely not. There is no room for anger.’ So we should neutralize our anger at the point where we act, and thus there would not be room for anger in our action.

Answer: Exactly. There’s a well-known exchange in one of Ram Dass’s books where he comes to his teacher with the same question. He says something like: ‘Is there any place for anger in spiritual life?’ His teacher answers: ‘Absolutely not. Anger is completely incompatible with any kind of genuine spirituality. However, sometimes certain teachings are best delivered at high volume and with great precision, and with an emphatic impact on the listener.’ And Sharon Salzberg asked Dipa Ma what a Western woman travelling in India should do if she was harassed in the street. Dipa Ma said, ‘You establish loving- kindness firmly in your heart, and then you take your umbrella and you strike! Firmly – right on the top of the head!’

So there’s no room for anger, but to be fierce is something different. And most experienced and accomplished Buddhist teachers will manifest fierceness from time to time. But there’s no anger there.

Ajahn Chah was well known for having had a very hot temper when he was a younger monk; he could be very angry. Once a monk had broken some serious rules at the monastery and was going through a formal penance. Another monk was giving Ajahn Chah a foot massage when the monk who had misbehaved came along. Ajahn Chah spoke to him in a really abrupt way, tersely and harshly: ‘Do this! Go over there! Don’t do that! That’s all wrong! Get out of here!’ This went on for five minutes or so and the other monk went scurrying off. When he’d gone Ajahn Chah carried on with his conversation with the monk who was giving the foot massage. That monk later said that not for a second during the whole incident was there any extra tension in Ajahn Chah’s body. His body was totally relaxed and at ease throughout. It was appropriate for him to be fierce with the other monk, but he had no hurtful intent, and there was no tension, no attitude of harming within him, as evidenced in his body. He was completely at ease, there was no tightening.

Question: So fierceness and anger are very close, but their outcome is very different. I need to know the difference, and it sounds as if it’s the tension. If I felt tension in my body, it would be unskilful.

Answer: Well that’s more of a symptom rather than a cause. The main issue more to do with the attitude. Fierceness is applied with no intention of harming. When you’re angry you want to harm, and there’s a divisiveness. When there’s fierceness founded on mettā, it’s based on a wholesome attitude. But it is extremely difficult to be clear about this.

With fierceness there’s no hate in your mind, no harming intent there. That’s the attitude to clarify and establish. And that’s why this process of ‘tracing back the radiance’ is so helpful, because it helps us to see our attitude really closely. We’re not only establishing a good reason, having a good rationale; it’s something much deeper. It’s a genuine attitude of caring, well- wishing, and it can be expressed by a fierce delivery if that’s what is appropriate and useful at that time.

Question: So based on what you’re saying, Arahants do not get angry?

Answer: I would say so. Though they might look very fierce.

Question: But books about Mahā-Boowa seem to show him as very angry.

Answer: He acts that way too.4

Question: But he’s not angry, though?

Answer: No. Ajahn Mahā-Boowa is one of the most highly respected monks in Thailand, believed to be an Arahant, but he’s a real old curmudgeon. Many years ago the Buddhist group in London which originally invited our community to come from Thailand and establish a branch there had a close connection with Ajahn Mahā-Boowa, whose senior Western monk, Ajahn Paññavaddho, was one of the original monks at the Hampstead Vihara London. George Sharp, the head of the London Buddhist group, went to his monastery in Thailand, Wat Pa Baan Taad, to invite him to come to England to teach, but he was given a very cold reception. Ajahn Mahā-Boowa was very curt and blunt with him. Several encounters over George’s first few days there had the same kind of tone; he seemed to be very grumpy and irritated.

After a few days George decided to ask him through the translator why he seemed to be so rude, impatient and dismissive. But Ajahn Mahā-Boowa just started laughing and laughing, and answered: ‘Oh, that’s just my personality. Don’t make anything out of that. That’s nothing. I’m just a coarse, rude guy. Sorry.’

That’s how he appears on the surface, and people who know him well are familiar with that. But there’s a difference between personality traits and purity of heart. Someone can be totally enlightened, but like Ajahn Mahā-Boowa have a character type that’s quite off-putting or aggressive. But there’s no harming attitude, no cruelty, no unkindness in his heart. It’s just the way things would come out. He’d say: ‘I was a boxer! I’m an aggressive guy. That’s how it comes out. I don’t mean any harm.’ In his Dhamma talks there are a lot of boxing analogies. You get into the ring with the kilesas, the defilements, and you keep hitting them and hitting them; and if they knock you down you get up and hit them again until you get that killer punch in, and the kilesas go down and they never get up! That’s his conditioning; his personality type is that punchy, coarse type. But that’s just the skin, the surface.

3 Dipa Ma (1911–1989) was a Bangladeshi meditation teacher of Theravada Buddhism. She also taught in the United States, influencing the Vipassana movement there.

4 These teachings were given before Ajahn Mahā-Boowa’s death January 2011.