## Trusting in Simplicity

I speak about the attitude of conviviality  to encourage you to see the holy life as something beautiful and enjoyable, and to open to it rather than just shut down in order to ‘get on with my practice.’ Conviviality is goodwill, happiness, brightness, welcoming, opening. When I’m convivial, I’m open. When I’m in a bad mood then I’m not open: ‘Leave me alone, don’t bother me!’ Sometimes we see meditation as a way of shutting ourselves off from things rather than opening. Remember, whatever is said is limited, so when we say ‘shut down’ these are only words which convey some meaning to you in whatever way you grasp them.

In any religious tradition there is a lot of confusion because what is said at times seems to be contradictory. At one moment you are being told to shut down, close your eyes, concentrate your mind on the breath, then told to open up with mettā for all sentient beings. This is just to point out the limitation of words and conventions. When we grasp these conventions we tend to bind ourselves to a particular view. We might even be encouraged to do this by teachers, or by the way we interpret the scriptures. But remember to bring it back to the awareness that each of us experiences, which is the centre of the universe.

When you see yourself in personal terms as someone who needs to get or get rid of something, you limit yourself to being someone who has to get something you don’t yet have or get rid of something you shouldn’t have. So we reflect on this and learn to be the witness, Buddho – that which is awake and aware, which listens to and knows personality views and emotional states without taking them personally. We’re being the witness rather than operating from the position that ‘I’m meditating’ or that ‘I must get something that I don’t yet have. I’ve got to attain certain states of concentration in order to get to yet more advanced meditation practices.’ It’s not that this belief is wrong, but it limits you to always being someone who has to get or attain something. Alternatively, you go into the purification mode: ‘I’m a sinner and I need to purify myself. I’ve got to get rid of bad thoughts and habits, childish emotions, greed, hatred, delusion, desire.’ You’re assuming that you are somebody who has these negative qualities. That’s why this awareness, this awakeness, is the essence of Buddhist teaching. Buddho simply means awakened awareness.

What I encourage is a moving towards simplicity, rather than complexity. We’re already complicated personalities. Our cultural and social conditioning is usually very complicated. We’re educated and literate, which means that we know a lot and have a great deal of experience. This means that we are no longer simple. We’ve lost the simplicity we had as children and have become rather complicated characters. The monastic form is a move towards simplicity. At times it may look complicated, but the whole thrust of the Dhamma-Vinaya is towards simplifying everything rather than complicating it.

What is most simple is to wake up. Buddha means ‘awake’, it’s as simple as that. The most profound teaching is the phrase ‘wake up.’ Hearing this, one then asks, ‘What am I supposed to do next?’ We complicate it again because we’re not used to being really awake and fully present. We’re used to thinking about things and analyzing, trying to get something or get rid of something, achieving and attaining. In the scriptures there are occasions where a person is enlightened just by a word or by something very simple.

One tends to think that people in the past had more pāramī, more ability than us to awaken and be fully liberated. We see ourselves through complicated memories and perceptions. My personality is very complicated. It has likes and dislikes; it feels happy and sad. It is so changeable that it can alter in just the snap of a finger. My emotions can be triggered off into anger in a moment simply by somebody saying something that irritates me. When certain conditions arise then the consequent state comes to be: anger, happiness, elation and so on. But with sati-sampajañña we’re learning to sustain an awareness that transcends these emotions. If we couldn’t do this then there would be no hope, no point in even trying to be Buddhist monks or nuns, or anything else at all. We’d just be helpless victims of our habits, and no way out of being trapped in the repetitive patterns would be possible. The way out is awakeness, attention.

How we hold meditation, Theravada Buddhism, or whatever convention it might be we are using, shows how easy it is to have strong views. People have very strong views, and when they hold to any religious convention they tend to form strong opinions around it. In Theravada circles you have strong views such as: ‘We’re the original teaching, the pure teaching; you’ve got to do this in order to get that; saṁsāra and nibbāna are the polar opposites.’ These are just some of the viewpoints and ideas we get from holding to a tradition. But in awakened consciousness there’s no convention. Instead, such consciousness perceives phenomena in terms of Dhamma – the natural way. It’s not created or dependent upon conditions supporting it. If you hold to a view, then you are bound and limited by that very thing you are grasping.

In awakened awareness there’s no grasping. It’s a simple, immanent act of being here, being patient. It takes trust, especially trusting in yourself. No one can make you do it, or magically do it for you. Trusting this moment is therefore very important. I am by nature a questioner, a doubter or sceptic. I don’t believe easily. I tend to disbelieve and I’m suspicious of things. This is an unpleasant condition to live with, because I would love to believe in something, to rest in a belief that I am fully committed to.

In contrast, the sceptical approach is a real challenge. One has to use it to learn to trust, not in any view, opinion or doctrine but in the simple ability that each of us has to be aware. Awareness includes concentration. When you do concentration practices or put your attention on one thing, you shut out everything else. With samatha practice one chooses an object and then sustains and holds one’s attention on it. With awareness, it’s broad like a floodlight. It’s wide open and includes everything, whatever it may be.

Learning to trust in this awareness is an act of faith, but it is also very much aligned with wisdom. It’s something you have to experiment with to get a feeling for. No matter how well I might describe or expound on this particular subject, it is still something you have to know for yourself. Doubt is one of your main problems, because you don’t trust yourselves. Many of you strongly believe you are defined by the limitations of your past, your memories, your personality; you’re thoroughly convinced, but you can’t trust that. I can’t trust my personality; it will say anything! Nor can I trust my emotions; they flicker around and change constantly. Depending on whether the sun’s out or if it is raining, or if things are going well or falling apart, my emotions react accordingly. What I trust is my awareness. It is something for you to find out for yourselves. You can’t just trust what I say. Anything I describe now is simply an encouragement for you to develop this trust in awareness.

This inclusive awareness is very simple and totally natural. The mind stops and you are open and receptive. Even if you’re tense and uptight, just open to it by accepting it and allowing it to be as it is. Tension, despair, pain – you allow your experience to be exactly as it is rather than try to get rid of it. If you conceive of this openness as a happy state, then you create a mental impression of it as a pleasant state that you might not be feeling and would like to feel. Being in a pleasant state of mind is not a prerequisite for inclusive awareness. One can be in the pits of hell and misery and yet still open to the experience of being aware, and thus allow even the most upsetting states to be just what they are.

I’ve found this to be a real challenge, for there are so many mental and emotional states that I don’t like at all. I’ve spent my life trying to get rid of them. From childhood onwards one develops the habit of trying to get rid of unpleasant mental states by distracting one’s attention, doing anything to try and get away from them. One develops so many ways of distracting oneself from feelings such as despair, unhappiness, depression and fear – one no longer even does so consciously. It becomes habitual to distract oneself from painful experience. The encouragement now is to begin to notice those painful states, even to notice the way one distracts oneself. Inclusive awareness is a state of not really knowing anything in particular. You’re allowing things to be what they are, not the way you think they are or the way you think they should be. You don’t have to perceive them with thoughts or words, or analyze them; you’re simply allowing the experience to be just the way it is. It’s more a case of developing an intuitive sense, what I call ‘intuitive awareness’. When you can begin to trust in this awareness, you can relax a bit. If you’re trying to control the mind, then you tend to go back to your habits of trying to hold on to some things and get rid of others, rather than just allowing things to be what they are.

With intuitive awareness we are taking refuge in awakeness – which is expansive, unlimited. Thought and mental conception create boundaries. The body is a boundary; emotional habits are boundaries; language is a boundary; words expressing feelings are also boundaries. Joy, sorrow and neutrality are all conditioned and dependent upon other conditions. Through awakening we begin to recognize that which transcends all of this. Even if what I’m saying sounds like rubbish to you, be aware of that. Open to the fact you don’t like what I’m saying. It’s like this. It’s not that you have to like it. It’s starting from the way it is rather than having to figure out what I’m trying to say.

The thought of parting has a certain effect on consciousness. But whatever is happening for you now is just that way, it is what it is. Separation and the idea of separation is like this. It’s a matter of recognizing what it is but not judging what you see. As soon as you add to it in any way, it is more than what it actually is; it becomes personal, emotional, complicated. This sense realm in which we live, this planet Earth, is like this. One’s whole life is an endless procession of meeting and separating. We get so used to it that we hardly notice it or reflect on it. Sadness is the natural response to being separated from what one likes, from people one loves. The emotion we feel is sadness, but when the emotion is held in awareness then the awareness itself is not sad. The same is true when being present with thinking of something that gives rise to excitement or joy. The awareness is not excited, it holds the excitement. Awareness embraces the feeling of excitement or sadness, but it does not get excited or sad. So it’s a matter of learning to trust in that awareness rather than just endlessly struggling with whatever feelings might be arising.

Have you ever noticed that even when you’re in a state of complete confusion there’s something that is not lost in that confusion? There’s an awareness of the confusion. If you are not clear about this, then it is easy to attach to the state of being confused and wind yourself up even more, creating even more complications. If you trust yourself to open to the confusion, you will begin to find a way of liberating yourself from being caught in the conditioned realm, endlessly being propelled into emotional habits arising out of fear and desire.

Desire is natural to this realm, so why shouldn’t we have desire? What’s wrong with desire anyway? We struggle to get rid of all our desires. Trying to purify our minds and conquer desire becomes a personal challenge. But can you do it? I can’t. I can suppress desires sometimes and convince myself that I don’t have any, but I can’t sustain it. When you contemplate the way things are, you see that this realm is like this – what is attractive and beautiful one desires to move towards and grasp; what is ugly and repulsive gives rise to the impulse to withdraw. That’s just the way it is; it’s not some kind of personal flaw. There is an awareness that embraces the movement of attraction and aversion. You can be aware of being attracted and aware of being repelled.

This awareness is subtle and simple. But if it’s never pointed out, we won’t learn to trust it, and will tend to relate to meditation from the mindset of achieving and attaining. It is very easy to go back into this dualistic struggle: trying to get and trying to get rid of. Right and wrong, good and bad – we’re easily intimidated by righteous feelings. It’s very easy to get righteous when we’re dealing with religion. In one way we’re right – we should let go of desire and we should take on responsibility for our lives and keep the precepts, and we should strive on with diligence. This is right, this is good.

Some might accuse me of teaching a path where it doesn’t matter how you behave, that you can just do anything and simply watch it: you could rob a bank and still be mindful of your actions; you could experiment with drinking and taking drugs, or see how mindful and aware you are when hallucinating on mushrooms! If I did teach that, the door would be wide open, wouldn’t it? I’m not promoting that viewpoint. I’m not saying you should disregard the precepts.

The precepts are a vehicle that simplifies our lives and limits behaviour. If we don’t have boundaries for behaviour then we tend to get lost. If we have no way of knowing limitations, then we just follow any impulse or idea. Vinaya and sīla is always a form of restriction. It’s a vehicle; its purpose is to aid reflection. But if we grasp it we become a person who obeys all of the rules without reflecting on what we’re doing. This is the other extreme of the complete hedonistic way: you become institutionalized into the monastic form, keeping the party line and obeying all of the rules, being a good monk or nun, feeling that is what you are supposed to do – but you’re not really aware of what you’re doing. Some of you are probably thinking, ‘Well I’m not ready for that yet. What you’re teaching is for advanced students. I just need to learn how to be a good monk or a good nun.’ This is fine, learn how to be a good monk or nun, but also connect with simply being aware.

The doubting mind, the thinking mind, the righteous mind, the suspicious mind will always come up with questions and uncertainties. The thing to do is to avoid complicating matters even more by adopting another role. Learn to see and observe how the restrictions of this monastic form bring into the open one’s resistance, indulgence, attachment and aversion. All of these reactions are like this. By seeing things in this way you’re going beyond the dualistic structures of thought and conditioned phenomena. Your refuge is in the Deathless, the Unconditioned – in Dhamma itself rather than someone else’s view about Dhamma.

Over the years I’ve developed this awareness so that now I experience consciousness as being very expanded; there’s a huge spaciousness I can rest in. The conditions I’m experiencing both physically and emotionally are reflected in that spaciousness; they’re held and supported in it, allowed to be. If I didn’t develop this awareness then it would be difficult, because I’d always be struggling with my feelings. At one point in time the sangha will be going well. People will be saying they love Amaravati and want to remain monks and nuns all their lives, and that they believe Theravada Buddhism is the only way. Then all of a sudden they change, saying they’re fed up with this joint and want to convert to some other religion. So one can feel dejected and think one has to convince them that joining some other religion is not the way, and get into one’s righteous Buddhist mood about how ‘right’ we are. We can get into thinking we’ve got everything here, and that it’s wonderful and people should be grateful.

One can say, ‘Don’t be selfish, don’t be stupid.’ Emotionally we are like that. If we’re emotionally attached to the way we do things, then we feel threatened by anyone who questions it. I’ve found in my own life that whenever someone starts criticizing Theravada Buddhism, our sangha, or the way we do things, my getting upset about it is due to my personality and its tendency to attach and identify with these things. You can’t trust that at all. But you can trust awareness. As you begin to recognize it and know it, you can rest more in being aware and listening to the sound of silence. As you sustain awareness in this way, consciousness can expand and become infinite. When this occurs you are present in a conscious moment and you lose the sense of being a self – being a person, this body. It just drops away and can no longer sustain itself.

It is not possible for emotional habits to sustain themselves because, being impermanent, their nature is to arise and cease. As you rest in awareness you begin to recognize the value of this expansiveness – which some people call ‘emptiness’. It doesn’t really matter what you choose to name it, so long as you can recognize it. It’s a natural state, it’s not created – I don’t create this emptiness. It’s not that I have to go through a whole process of concentrating my mind on something in order to be able to do this and then, having done so, hold my mind there in order to block out everything else. On the other hand, when I was into concentration practices I’d always get frustrated – because just when I’d be getting somewhere someone would slam the door! That type of practice is all about trying to shut out, control and limit everything. It can be skilful to do that kind of practice, but if you hold on to it then you are limited by it. You can’t take life as it comes and instead you become controlling of everything. The result of that type of practice is that life has to be a certain way: ‘I have to be at this place, live with these people, not with those people; I need these structures and conditions in order to be able to get my samādhi.’ So then you are bound to that way of structuring your life.

You see monks going all over the place trying to find the perfect monastery where they can get their samādhi together. But in this expansive awareness everything belongs, so it doesn’t demand certain conditions in which it may be cultivated. Intuitive awareness allows you to accept life as a flow, rather than being endlessly frustrated when life seems difficult or unpleasant.

Coming into the Temple this evening was very nice indeed. The stillness of the place is fantastic. This is the best place in the whole world! That’s only an opinion, you know, not a pronouncement. I find the stillness and silence in this place to be palpable as soon as I come in. But then, can I spend the rest of my life sitting in here? Stillness is here in the heart. Stillness is about being present. It’s not dependent on a temple or a place. Trusting in your awareness, you begin to notice that even in the midst of places like London and Bangkok, in confusing or acrimonious situations, you can always recognize this stillness once you value and appreciate it. It does take determination to be able to do this. Much of the time it doesn’t seem like anything, and having goal-orientated practices seems more attractive: ‘I want something to do, something to get my teeth into.’ We’re conditioned to always be doing something rather than just trusting and opening to the present. We can even make this into a big deal: ‘I’ve got to open to the present all of the time!’ Then we just grasp the idea of it – which is not what I mean.

Conviviality is an attitude of being at ease with life, of openness and ease with being alive and breathing, at ease with being present with what is arising in consciousness. If you grasp the idea, ‘I should be convivial,’ then you’ve missed the point. What I’m saying is merely an encouragement towards trusting, relaxing and letting go. Enjoy life here, open to it rather than endlessly trying to perfect it – because that can bind you to a critical attitude. Instead, if there’s aversion, open to it and let it be what it is. So I’m not asking that you not be averse, but just to open to that aversion or restlessness, or to whatever positive or negative feelings you may have.