## Don’t Take it Personally

We have just three weeks left  of the Vassa (Rains Retreat). The words in this sentence are perceptions of time and change in the conditioned realm. Vassa is a convention. The autumn doesn’t say, ‘I’m autumn’; we call it autumn. This is a convention we use for communicating our cultural attitudes or moral agreements. Conventions are made up and are dependent on other things. Things that are considered good in one conventional form are not considered appropriate in another. We have various biases or prejudices we get from our culture and the conventions that we have. Just living in Europe we have old biases of what the French are like, and the Germans, Italians and so forth.

We have cultural attitudes as a way of perceiving things. We form various opinions and views. That is why it’s easy to have ethnic warfare and racial prejudices, class snobbery and so forth, because we never question the conventions we have adopted. We simply go along with them. We hold various views about our religion, race and culture, and then compare it to somebody else’s. On that level we have ideals, of democracy, equality and all that, but we’re still very much influenced by the conventional views we’re conditioned by.

It takes quite a determined effort to get beyond your cultural conditioning. Being American, there was a lot that I just assumed. I never realized how arrogant I could be until I had to live in another culture. I never saw how American idealism could be another blind spot, shoving our ideas down people’s throats, saying America knows what’s good for everybody, how they should run their countries. When you’re brought up to think you’re in the most advanced society, then that’s the assumption. I don’t think I was taught this view in any intentional way. It was assumed. It was an underlying attitude.

It’s hard to get beyond these assumptions, these things we pick up. We don’t even know we have these attachments until they’re reflected in some way. That’s why living in different cultures helps. Living in Thailand helped me see a lot of these things because the culture was so different. There was the whole attitude that came from living in a Buddhist monastery, where the emphasis was on reflection, mindfulness and wisdom. I wasn’t just becoming a kind of ersatz Thai, ‘going native’ as they say, but was learning to see the subtleties of attitudes and assumptions I was conditioned by, attitudes that may not be easily seen until one finds oneself suffering about something.

One of the problems we have in meditation is compulsiveness. In our society we are brought up to be obsessed and compulsive. When you’re coming from ideas and ideals the result is there are so many ‘shoulds’ in your vocabulary. Idealism has its beauty, so it’s not a matter of disregarding it but of recognizing its limitations. This feeling that there is always something we’ve got to do, that there is something we haven’t done we should be doing, that we should be working harder than we’re working, that we should be practising more than we’re practising, that we should be more honest than we are, more open, more devout, better-natured and on and on. All of these are true. The ‘shoulds’ are usually right. If things were perfect, then I would be perfect. Everything would be just perfect. I would be an ideal and my society would be ideal. Amaravati would fit the ideal; we would all be perfect. Then there would be nothing more you should do because you’ve already reached the top. But that’s not the way life is.

An idea is something we create. We take our ideas from what’s the best or what’s the most beautiful, perfect, fair or just. But the Buddha is pointing to the way life is, its changingness. It doesn’t stick at the best, does it? You can’t hold on to anything. For instance, you contemplate roses. Sometimes you get a perfect rose just at its peak, absolutely perfect in its form, its colour, its fragrance, but you can’t keep it that way. It lasts that way very briefly before it starts going the other way and then you just want to get rid of it, throw it out and get another one.

With mindfulness we’re aware of this changingness. In terms of our own experience in meditation, we’re aware of how things change, like moods and feelings. When we think of how things ‘should be’, we get back into ideas again. We then compare ourselves to ideas we have, what good practice is, how many hours a day one should sit in meditation, how one should do this and how one should do that – and on and on like this. We can operate from these ideas, which are often very good. But the problem with this, even if one performs according to all these ‘shoulds’, is that there is always the feeling that there’s something more you should be doing, something that could be better. It goes on endlessly. You never get to the root of the problem. When we reach the end of this, sometimes we just give up: ‘I’ve had enough of this. To hell with it. I’m going to enjoy life. I’ll disrobe and go out and have a good time, eat, drink and make merry until I die.’ Because one can only be driven so far. You can’t sustain it and you reach a point where it doesn’t work anymore.

To listen to ‘should’ is a fair enough way to think about something. Some people think we shouldn’t even think ‘should’! To recognize how things affect us, notice feeling that there is something more you think you have to do. An example of this is the story about a recurring dream I used to have when I first went to stay with Ajahn Chah. In 1963 I finished my master’s degree in Berkeley. That was a year of compulsive and intense study; I couldn’t enjoy anything. Every time I went out and tried to enjoy myself I would think, ‘You’ve got your exam coming. You’ve got to pass your master’s degree.’ I’d go to a party and try to relax and this voice would say, ‘You shouldn’t be here. You’ve got to take this exam and you’re not ready. You’re not good enough for it.’ So that whole year I couldn’t enjoy myself. I just kept driving myself.

After I finished my master’s degree I couldn’t read a book for about six months. My mind just wouldn’t concentrate. Then I went through Peace Corps training in Hawaii, and they wanted me to read all sorts of things. I couldn’t. I couldn’t even read the instructions. I was overloaded. But that left a kind of intensity, where the way I would approach anything would be either to think, ‘I can’t do it’ and give up, or get into the old compulsive mode.

When I went to stay with Ajahn Chah, I kept having a recurring dream as a result of putting a lot of effort into my practice. In the dream, I’d be going into a coffee shop. I’d sit down, order a cup of coffee and a nice pastry, and then the voice would say, ‘You shouldn’t be here. You should be studying for the exam.’ That would be the recurring theme for this dream, which I had quite often. I’d ask myself, ‘What’s it telling me? What could it be?’ And then my compulsive mind kept thinking this was a message, ‘There’s something I’m not doing that I should be doing. I should be practising more. I should be more mindful. I shouldn’t be sleeping so much.’ I wasn’t actually sleeping much at all. I couldn’t drive myself any more than I was already doing. I couldn’t figure it out. Then one morning after having this dream, I woke up and I had the answer. The answer was: there wasn’t any examination!

I realized that I lived my life as if I were always going to be tested, or brought before the authorities and put to the test, and I was never ready or good enough. There was always more. I could study more. I could read more. I could do things more. I shouldn’t be lazy, I shouldn’t enjoy life because this would be wasting my time, because the exam is coming and I’m not ready for it. It was a whole kind of emotional conditioning I had acquired because the school system in the States is very competitive. You start when you’re five years old and you just keep going.

So I had the insight there wasn’t any exam, I just thought there was, and I had always lived my life with this attitude that there was going to be a big test I wasn’t prepared for. Maybe it was also from my religious background: you’re going to be tested when you die, to see whether you’ve been good enough to go to heaven, and if not you’ll go to hell. There’s always this sense that you’ve got to do something. ‘I’ve got too many faults. I’ve got to get rid of them. I’ve got to become something that I’m not. The way I am is not good enough.’

When I came into monastic life, I brought this tendency of being driven into how I practised, and I could do it for a while. But then I realized that if I was going to be a monk, that wasn’t the purpose of the life. It wasn’t meant to be that way. It was just how I was interpreting monasticism from this compulsive viewpoint. Once I got the answer to the riddle, I stopped having the dream.

One of the first three fetters is sakkāya-diṭṭhi, personality view. We’re not born with a personality view. It’s something we acquire after we are born. Of course, when you’re brought up in a competitive system you see yourself in comparison with others and with ideals. Your value and worth is very much related to what’s considered the best, and who’s the best. If you don’t fit into the ‘best’ category, you sometimes see yourself in terms of not being good enough. Even the people who I used to think of as the best didn’t think of themselves in that way. Sometimes we think some people are much happier than they are because we project that onto them. We think they are better off than we are.

When the Buddha emphasized mindfulness as the Path, he was pointing to the way things are rather than to the best. At Wat Pah Pong, in the morning they’d have readings from the suttas about what a monk should be, and they were all according to the ideal standard. Wondering how to interpret this, wanting to live up to such high standards gave rise to a feeling of ‘can I really do all that?’ One can feel discouraged and despairing because one is looking at life in terms of ideals. But the teaching of the Buddha isn’t based on ideals but on Dhamma, the way things are.

In vipassanā, insight meditation, you’re tuning in to impermanence, into tragedy. This isn’t a matter of how things should be but of how they are. All conditioned phenomena are impermanent. It’s not that one is saying that all conditioned phenomena should be impermanent. They are. It’s a matter of opening to impermanence. It’s not trying to project this idea onto life but of using your intuitive mind to open, to watch, to pay attention. Then you’re aware of the changingness. You’re aware of even your own compulsive attitude, ‘There’s something I’ve got to do.’ You’re aware of that compulsive feeling, attitude or belief that ‘I’m a person with a lot of faults and weaknesses,’ which is easy to believe as being honest and realistic. Then we think that in order to become an enlightened being we’ve got to get over these, get rid of them in some way and become an arahant. This way of thinking is often what we read into the scriptures. But in terms of reflective awareness, you notice that such a way of thinking is something you’ve created in your mind: ‘I am a person with a lot of faults and weaknesses and I’ve got to practise hard in order to overcome them.’ That’s something I’m creating in my mind. I’m creating that attitude. That’s not the truth; that’s a creation. That which is aware of all this is the awakened state of being. You start to notice the difference between this awareness and what you create by habits based on attachments. One sees this is how the mind works.

In our practice we can use the word Buddho, the very name ‘Buddha’, meaning the ‘one who knows.’ It’s a significant word because it is pointing to a state of attention, of knowing directly, of intuitive awareness, of wisdom. There’s no person. If I say, ‘I am Buddha,’ then that’s coming from personality again, identity. Thinking ‘I am the Buddha’ doesn’t work. We have refuge in Buddha: Buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi. That’s a convention too, but it points to a reality that we can begin to trust, which is awareness. The Buddha is Buddho, the ‘one who knows’, that which knows, which is awake and aware. It’s awakeness. It’s not judgemental or critical. The Buddha is not saying, ‘You should be like this and you shouldn’t be like that.’ Buddho is knowing that all conditioned phenomena are like this. Whereas if you’re brought up in a religion like Christianity, God tells you what you should be. At least this is the way I was taught: how you should be a good boy and every time you’re bad you hurt God’s feelings. If I told a lie, God would be very disappointed in me. This is a kind of moral training as a child. It’s what your parents think. It’s all mixed up with perceptions of parents, and God as a kind of parental figure.

Awakeness is about learning to listen and trust in this most simple state of being. It’s not jhāna or absorption in anything. It’s pure attention. If you trust in this purity, there are no faults in it. It’s perfect. There’s no impurity. This is where to trust, in this attentiveness to the present. Once you try to find it, then you start going into doubt. Trust it rather than think about it. Just trust in the immanent act of being awake, attentive in this moment. When I do this, my mind relaxes and I hear the sound of silence. There’s no self. There is purity. If I start feeling that ‘I should be doing something,’ then I’m aware of it. I’m aware of the kamma-vipāka (the results of actions) of having been through the American education system and driven myself through this incredibly compulsive way of living life. This state of purity is not personal. It’s not saying, ‘Ajahn Sumedho is pure now.’ I’m not talking about it in any kind of personal way. It is not a creation. I’m not creating the purity or an ideal of it and then deluding myself with it. It’s beyond that. It is a recognition, a realization.

This is where trusting comes in, because your personality view is not going to trust that purity. Your personality view is going to say, ‘There’s nothing pure about you. You just had some dirty thoughts. You’re feeling pretty upset and angry about something someone said about you. After all these years, you’re still filled with impurities.’ Personality view is the inner tyrant. It’s the victim and the victimizer. As the victim it says, ‘Poor me. I’m so impure,’ whilst as the accuser it says, ‘You’re not good enough, you’re impure.’ It’s both. You can’t trust it. Don’t take refuge in being a victim or a victimizer. But you can trust in this awakened awareness, and that trust is humbling. It isn’t like believing in something. It’s learning to relax and be. Trust in the ability to simply be here, open and receptive to whatever is happening now. Even if what’s happening is nasty – whatever conditions you’re experiencing – that’s not a problem if you trust in this purity.

With the Vinaya, for example, the personality view even attaches to this idea of trying to keep it pure. ‘Is my Vinaya as pure as someone else’s?’ Then you’re just using this convention to increase the sense of personal worth or worthlessness. If you think you’re more pure than the rest, then that’s arrogance, an attitude of being holier-than-thou. If you think you’re impure, then you’re going to feel hopeless, that you can’t do it. You might even think it’s better to go and get drunk or something: just to forget about Vinaya for a while, relax and have a good time – instead of beating yourself up with your ideals of not being pure enough.

Conventions themselves are limited, for their nature is imperfect and changing. Perhaps you expect the convention to be perfect. Then maybe after a while you become critical of the convention because you see flaws in it. It isn’t as good as you thought, or some of it doesn’t make sense, things like this. But recognize that a convention is like anything else, it is anicca, dukkha, anattā, impermanent, unsatisfactory, non-self. Theravada Buddhism is a convention based on morality: doing good and refraining from doing evil with action and speech. It’s a way of living where we agree to take responsibility for how we live on this planet, in this society. The convention of Theravada Buddhism, whether you find it all agreeable or not, is a tradition with a lot of power from being so old and ancient, and is still useful. It’s still a viable tradition that works. It’s not a matter of it having to be perfect for us to use it, but of learning to use it for awakened awareness.

Then we get into the old Buddhist camps of the Mahayana, Vajrayana and Hinayana. We’re considered Hinayana or ‘Lesser Vehicle.’ We could think that means it’s probably not as good. Mahayana is better, says logic. Lesser Vehicle and Greater Vehicle. Then Vajrayana, that’s the absolute best. You can’t get any better than Vajrayana according to the Tibetans. That’s the highest vehicle. Then we start thinking in terms of good, better, best. But all of these are conventions. Whether we call it Mahayana, Hinayana or Vajrayana, they’re still just conventions: they’re limited, they’re imperfect. They’re functional, to be used for mindfulness rather than as some kind of attachment or position that one takes.

These different terms can be very divisive. If we attach to Theravada and start looking down on every other form of Buddhism, we think that they’re not pure, they’re not original. They’re ‘higher’, but they’re not original. We can get arrogant because we’ve got our own way of justifying our convention. But this is all playing with words. If we look at what is going on with the words, we’re just creating Mahayana, Vajrayana and Hinayana in our minds. The refuge is in Buddha, not in these yānas. The Buddha knows that every thought is changing and not-self. So trust in the simplicity of that because if you don’t, then it’s going to arouse your old compulsive habits of thinking ‘I’ve got to do more, I’ve got to develop this, I’ve got to become a Bodhisattva, I’ve got to get the higher practice going,’ and on and on.

When you’re caught in that conventional realm, and that’s all you know, then you’re easily intimidated and blinded by all the dazzling positions, attitudes and ideas people can throw at you. This is where trusting in awareness is not a matter of having the best, or feeling that maybe you should have something better than what you have. These are creations of your mind. When you establish what is adequate, it’s not based on what is the best but on what is basic for survival and good health.

In Buddhist monasticism, the four requisites – clothing, food, medicine and shelter – are an expression of this. You don’t have to have the best food and the best robes and all that, but just what’s adequate in terms of survival. Is there any problem in terms of having a place to stay or medicine for sickness? It doesn’t have to be the very best. In fact, the standard is often established at the lowest point, like rag robes rather than silk robes. Then there is the standard of living in a place where the Dhamma-Vinaya is respected and taught. These give us a sense of a place where we can live. Material standards aren’t placed at the best, but if the Dhamma is taught, the Vinaya is respected and the four requisites are adequate, then that’s good enough. So go for it! Go for the practice rather than quibble about the rest. It’s better to develop one’s awareness rather than going along with one’s feelings of criticism or doubt in dealing with the people and the place you are in.

I contemplated this compulsive attitude in myself until I could really see it. It was insidious, not just a one-off insight. It reminded me of how I approached life in general, full of ‘shoulds’ and feeling there is something I should or shouldn’t be doing. Just notice and listen to this, and learn to relax and trust in the refuge. This is very humbling because this attention in the present doesn’t seem like anything much, or like it’s worth anything. ‘Attention in the present, so what? I want something I should be doing. Tell me what to do next. How many hours should I be sitting? How many hours should I be walking? What should I be developing? Should I do more mettā?’ We want something to do, and feel very ill at ease  when there is nothing to do, nowhere to go. In monastic life we do offer conventions and structures. We have morning and evening pūjā – meditation and devotional practices – and fortnightly recitations of the monastic rule and other routines – which gives us a conventional form to use in order to do something. Then there’s chanting and alms-round, things that are part of our tradition. This structure is here to help us, along with sīla for behaviour.

When people go on self-retreat, they let go of the structure and are left on their own. What happens when you’re on your own and nobody knows what you’re doing? You don’t have to look around to see if the senior monk is watching you. You’re left to your own devices. You could sleep all day or you could read novels or go for long walks, or you could really practise hard. There’s a whole range of possibilities and it’s left up to you to notice what happens when the structure is removed. It’s not that one does this in a judgemental way, bringing back the ‘shoulds’: ‘I should practise so many hours a day, sit so many hours, walk so many hours and do this and do that, get my samādhi together, really get somewhere in my practice.’ Not that that’s wrong, but it may be very compulsive. If you don’t live up to it, then what do you feel like? Do you feel guilt-ridden if you don’t do what you’ve determined to do? Notice how the mind works and awaken to it.

It’s easy if there is a strong leader who tells you to do this and do that, everybody come, everybody leave, and everybody marches in step and so forth. This is good training also. But it also brings up resistance and rebellion in some people who don’t like it. Other people love it because they don’t know what to do. If nobody’s telling them what to do next, they don’t know how to operate. They like the security of everything being controlled and held together by a strong leader. But recognize that monastic life is for the liberation of the heart. Some strong leaders kind of browbeat you, or manipulate you emotionally by saying, ‘If you want to please me, you will do this. If you really want my approval … I won’t give you my approval if you don’t behave properly,’ and things like this. I can use my emotional power to try to control and manipulate the situation, but that’s not something skilful. That’s not what we’re here for. The onus is on each one of us. It’s about waking up.

Don’t think you have to wake up because Ajahn Sumedho says so. Waking up is just a simple, immanent act of attention: open, relaxed listening, being here and now. It’s learning to recognize that, to appreciate that more and more and to trust it. What we’re trying to do here is to offer a situation where you are encouraged to trust and to cultivate this. When we say ‘cultivate’, it’s not like having to do anything. It’s more like learning to relax and trust in being with the flow of life. Because life is like this. Life changes. You can see this in the past year here at Amaravati, with the construction and the opening of the Temple and all the ambience around that. Now that period is over. It has changed. It’s like this.

I remember when I first went to Wat Pah Pong, there was such an esprit de corps. We were there with Ajahn Chah. There were only twenty-two monks, and we were really getting somewhere, a crack troop, top grade, top guns. Then a few years later I began seeing things I didn’t like and got very critical of it, thinking it was all falling apart. Then I saw it fall apart, after Ajahn Chah had his stroke. I remember going to Wat Pah Pong a few years after that. They had an inner monastery where the monks lived, and then the outer part where there was a special kuṭi for Ajahn Chah, which allowed for nursing care. In addition to this they had an outer sālā or reception hall, where people came to visit.

People would go to the outer sālā; nobody wanted to come to the rest of the monastery. All they wanted to do was to see Ajahn Chah, who was ill and couldn’t talk or do anything. All the emphasis was on his kuṭi, and no monks wanted to live at the monastery. I remember going there when there were only three monks in a huge monastery, Ajahn Liem and few others, and the place was looking pretty shabby. Usually it was spick and span, clean. The standards of order were very high there, sweeping the paths and repairing everything. But suddenly it was like a ghost town with all these empty kuṭis that needed repairing and were dirty and dusty, and the paths not swept and so forth. I remember some people from Bangkok coming to me and saying, ‘Aah, this place isn’t good any more. We want you to come back and be the abbot.’ They were thinking I should go back and take over because it had changed in a way they felt it shouldn’t have. But now it’s back to having fifty monks and operating at full capacity. Things change.

Now we open up to change. We’re not demanding it change in any way that we want it to, or that when it’s at its peak we can keep it that way. It’s impossible. Even in yourself, you can be aware when you’re at your best or your worst, when you’re feeling really good and inspired, and when you’re feeling down, despairing, lonely, depressed and disheartened. This awareness is your refuge. Awareness of the changingness of feelings, of attitudes, of moods, of material and emotional change. Stay with that, because it’s a refuge that is indestructible. It’s not something that changes. It’s a refuge you can trust in. This refuge is not something you create. It’s not a creation. It’s not an ideal. It’s practical and very simple but easily overlooked or not noticed. When you’re mindful, you’re beginning to notice: it’s like this.

When I remind myself with this awareness, this moment is pure. I really make a note of this: this is the Path, this is purity. It’s not anything I’m creating but it’s just this state of attention. Not attention like ‘Attention!’ as a military command, it’s a relaxed attention. Listening, open, receptive. When you relax into that, it’s a natural state. It’s not a created state. It’s not dependent on conditions making it that way. It’s just that we forget it all the time and get thrown back into the old habits. With mindfulness we’re remembering it more, trusting it more, and cultivating this way of bringing ourselves back into this awareness. Then we get carried away again … and come back again. We keep doing that. No matter how recalcitrant, difficult or wild the emotions or thoughts may be, it’s all right. This is the refuge.

We can apply this awareness to everything, such as being personally wounded. When somebody says something hurtful, ask the question, ‘What is it that gets hurt?’ If somebody insults or abuses me in some way and I feel hurt or misunderstood, offended, annoyed or even angry, what is it that gets angry, annoyed, offended? Is that my refuge – that personality whose feelings get hurt and upset? If I have awareness as a refuge, this never gets upset by anything. But as a person, I can be easily upset, because the personality, the sakkāya-diṭṭhi, is like that. It’s based on me being worthwhile or worthy, being appreciated or not appreciated, being understood properly or misunderstood, being respected or not respected, and all these kinds of things.

My personality is wide open to be hurt, to be offended, to be upset by anything. But personality is not my refuge. It’s not what I would advise as being a refuge – if your personality is anything like mine. I wouldn’t for a minute want to recommend anyone taking refuge in my personality! But in awareness, yes. Because awareness is pure. If you trust it more and more, even if you’re feeling hurt and upset, disrespected and unloved and unappreciated – awareness knows that as being anicca. It’s not judging. It’s not making any problems. It’s fully accepting the feeling that ‘nobody loves me, everybody hates me’ as a feeling. And it goes away naturally. It drops away because its nature is change.