## Introduction

More than thirty years ago, in 1984, the germinal monastic community of the newly opened Amaravati Buddhist Centre settled into a cluster of barrack-like buildings on a windy hilltop in Hertfordshire. The name of the new monastery (meaning ‘The Deathless Realm’) had been chosen both as a resonance of the ancient Buddhist city in Andhra Pradesh in southern India, and as a counteractive force to the ‘Mutually Assured Destruction’ of the nuclear arms race, then gleefully being pursued by Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher and the Soviet Union.

The meditation space that we used at that time was the former school gymnasium and assembly hall. The windows were cracked, patched with plastic and Sellotape, draughty or missing completely; gym markings criss-crossed the cold wooden floor; the large golden Buddha image sat up on the old school stage, spotlit and surrounded by filmy blue curtains that we had introduced in an attempt to beautify the shrine and suggest the quality of infinite space.

Since 1981, when the community was largely based at Cittaviveka Monastery, in Chithurst, West Sussex, it had been our custom to set aside the midwinter months, after the New Year, to be a time of communal retreat. At that time of year the English weather does not allow much in the way of building work to go on, visitors are few and the days are short and dark – it is thus a perfect situation to use for turning the attention inward and taking time to cultivate formal meditation practice in a very thorough way.

Amaravati was opened in 1984 in order to provide living space for the burgeoning monastic community (group photos of the time show more than twenty Eight-Precept postulants and forty nuns and monks), and to be a place where we could hold retreats for the public. So when this move was made it provided an even more expansive situation for the winter retreats and for Ajahn Sumedho to continue to guide the community in his inimitably comprehensive and inspiring way.

The winters of 1984, ’85 and ’86 were spectacularly icy; winds howled down from Siberia, seemingly uninterrupted by any solid object until they bit into our bones. It was not uncommon to be wearing six or seven layers of clothing through the day and then to climb into our sleeping bags at night with most of it still on. We sat bundled up in thick robes and blankets for meditation and to listen to instructional talks. The air was icy but vibrant as there was a powerful and pervasive sense of community spirit among us.

Sometimes, in those days, it seemed that the main source of energy in the whole system, and certainly what our hearts were warmed and guided by, was Ajahn Sumedho’s apparently limitless capacity to expound on the Dhamma, especially during the winter retreats. Naturally enough in that situation a lot of guidance was needed – the majority of us were fairly new to meditation and monastic training and needed all the help we could get, particularly within a routine of noble silence and walking and sitting meditation all day – thus Ajahn Sumedho gave extensive instruction, often two or three times a day. There would be ‘morning reflections’ during the first sitting of the day before dawn, often more reflections after the breakfast of gruel and tea, sometimes ‘questions & answers’ at afternoon teatime, and finally a formal Dhamma talk in the evening.

From those early icy times up until 2010, when he retired from the role of abbot and moved back to Thailand, Ajahn Sumedho continued to guide the monastic community at Amaravati. Every winter he explored and expounded on the Dhamma, and frequently there have been recordings made of his teachings. The book you hold is a small sample of the talks that he offered during the Winter Retreat of 2001.

Even though those days now seem a long way off in some respects, and much has changed, there are some elements that have remained stable to the present day, like a constantly returning phrase or rhythm in a musical piece or, more accurately, like the defining style of a master painter that instantly tells you: this is a Monet, that is a Van Gogh.

Now at Amaravati, the site of the old Dhamma Hall/gymnasium is occupied by the Temple, the new meditation hall constructed in stages through the 1990s. The orientation is slightly different – the building now faces east rather than north – and it is a soaring pyramidal structure, rather than a utilitarian rectangular box. The great light open space within is punctuated with a broad ring of solid oak pillars; it is so silent and still it seems to stop the minds of those who visit; the floor is a blanket of warm white rock, and a barn-like lattice of thick trusses and beams laces the high ceiling and the walls. However, the trees across the courtyard are still the same, just a little taller and fuller, and the brown weatherboarding on the remaining older buildings is  edged by frost in the winter morning light just as it was before.

In the same way that some elements of the buildings, and the members of the community, have changed and some have continued, the winter retreat teachings Ajahn Sumedho continued to give for many more years similarly matured and transformed. They were still built upon a foundation of many classic elements – the Four Noble Truths, reflections on the arising and ceasing of the five  khandhas, teachings on contemplation of mind (cittānupassanā) – but the manner of exposition of these and other key elements, as well as his development of particular skilful means (upāya) evolved and expanded as the years passed by. Thus, even though the talks gathered in this book can, in some respects, happily stand on their own, it might also be helpful to bear in mind that they exist within a context.

First of all, these talks were given to experienced monastics and a few well-seasoned laypeople. Many who were listening knew Ajahn Sumedho’s favourite themes very well, and he knew that they knew them well, therefore often explanatory material is left unsaid and much knowledge is assumed. Just as a musician might play a few notes to evoke a familiar piece and know of their audience: they can fill in the rest, they know that old theme! Or a painter might use a trademark motif thinking: pop in that bowler hat again, they know all the other places it appeared … Similarly here, Ajahn Sumedho is often exploring, describing and extemporizing on very familiar themes so that, if the reader occasionally feels a lack of explanation, if the meaning escapes one, the encouragement is to let the music, the balance of tones and colours tide you over.

Secondly, the aim of the editors in compiling this book has been explicitly to maintain the style and spirit of the spoken word. Dhamma talks have strong nonverbal element – the mood in the room, the energetic exchanges between the speaker and the listeners, the season, the hour of the day or night, all that has gone before within the group – so it is wiser to treat a collection of talks such as this as if exploring an art gallery or listening to a musical piece, rather than as a systematic explanation of a fixed subject. As Ajahn Sumedho himself commented, ‘The book is meant to be suggestions of ways to investigate conscious experience. It’s not meant to be a didactic treatise on Pali Buddhism.’

So, as you make your way through these pages, and you encounter ‘Intuitive Awareness’, ‘The End of Suffering is Now’, ‘The Sound of Silence’, and all the others, the suggestion is to let them be received into the heart, to allow them to resonate, and to let the intuitions and guidance that they spark ripen as they will. Just as, when we progress through an art gallery we don’t think, ‘What’s the exact information that this painting is imparting to me?’

Thirdly, ever since the time of the Buddha, his disciples have evinced a wide range of teaching styles and favourite themes when expounding the Dhamma. And this same variety is a striking characteristic of what is known today as the Thai Forest Tradition – the largely non-academic, meditation-centred, rural monastic communities that model their way of practice on the discipline and lifestyle of the Buddha and his earliest monastic disciples.

Over time an individual teacher will tend to take a particular Dhamma theme, or meditation technique, and spend years, sometimes decades exploring and expanding on that topic. For example, Luang Por Sim was noted for his emphasis on death contemplations; Ajahn Buddhadasa spent several years discoursing on  idapaccayatā  – the law of conditionality; Ajahn Toon Khippapañño vigorously insists the Path should be represented as  paññā,  sīla, samādhi, NOT as  sīla,  samādhi,  paññā; Ajahn Fun was known for his infinite extrapolations on the word ‘ Buddho’ – either as a concentration technique, an investigation of awareness or as a devotional practice; Luang Pu Dun was known for his teachings on ‘ citta (the heart) is Buddha;’ and Ajahn Chah was fond of putting conundrums to people, such as ‘If you can’t go forward, you can’t go back and you can’t stand still – where can you go?’ Or ‘Have you ever seen still, flowing water?’

Over time it is quite usual for such experienced teachers to develop not only their favourite themes but also to cultivate their own, often idiosyncratic usage of scriptural terms. For example, Ajahn Maha Boowa’s usage of the term ‘eternal  citta’, Ajahn Toon’s insistence on the radical difference between  dassanañāṇa and  ñāṇadassana, which can be translated as ‘vision and knowledge’ and ‘knowledge and vision’; or the word ‘ sakkhibhūto’ which Ajahn Chah employed to mean ‘a witness to the truth’, yet Pali scholars continue to wonder exactly where the term came from. In this light it might be useful to take a look at some of the terms that Ajahn Sumedho uses frequently in this collection – particularly ‘the sound of silence’, ‘intuitive awareness’ and ‘consciousness’ – that have taken on such distinctive meanings over the years.

The first of these, ‘the sound of silence’, is described in the Dhamma talk of the same name in quite some detail. However, as it is not a meditation method found in classical Theravada handbooks, it might be helpful to provide a little background to the way in which Ajahn Sumedho came to develop it, and to refer to some of the other spiritual traditions that use it as part of a meditation practice.

It was in the Winter Retreat of January 1981, at Chithurst Monastery, that Ajahn Sumedho first started to teach this method to the monastic community. He said that he had begun to notice the high-pitched, ringing tone when he left Thailand in 1977 and spent his first winter in England, in the Hampstead Buddhist Vihara. He pointed out that, as Thailand was such a noisy country, particularly amidst the crickets and cicadas in the forest at night (when one does most formal meditation practice), that he had not noticed this inner sound before. However, when he came to London, despite being a large metropolis, he found that it became very quiet late at night, especially when the air was muffled by the presence of a blanket of snow.

In the silence of those nights he began to perceive the ever-present inner sound, seemingly beginningless and endless, and he soon found that he was able to discern it throughout the day, and in many circumstances, whether quiet or busy. He also realized that he had indeed noticed it once before in his life, when he had been on shore leave from the US Navy in the late 1950s and when, during a walk in the hills, his mind had opened into a state of extreme clarity. He remembered that as a wonderfully pure and peaceful state, and he recalled that the sound had been very loud then, so those positive associations encouraged him to experiment and see if it might be a useful meditation object. It also seemed to be an ideal symbol, in the conditioned world of the senses, of those qualities of mind that transcend the sense realm: not subject to personal will; ever-present but only noticed if attended to; apparently beginningless and endless; formless, to some degree; and spatially unlocated.

When he first taught it to the sangha at Chithurst that winter, he referred to it as ‘the sound of silence’ and the name stuck. Later, as he began to teach the method on retreats for the lay community, he began to hear about its use from people experienced in Hindu and Sikh meditation practices. He found out that this form of concentration on the inner sound was known as ‘nada yoga’ or ‘the yoga of inner light and sound’ in these traditions. It also turned out that books had been written on the subject, commentaries in English as well as ancient scriptural treatises, notable among these being  The Way of Inner Vigilance by Salim Michael (originally published by Signet and later republished as  The Law of Attention by Inner Traditions). In 1991, when he taught it as a method on a retreat at a Chinese monastery in the USA, one of the participants was moved to comment that, ‘I think you have stumbled on the Shurangama  samādhi; there is a meditation on hearing that is described in that sutra and the practice you have been teaching us seems to match it perfectly.’

Seeing that it was a practice that was very accessible to a number of people, and as his own explorations of it deepened over the years, Ajahn Sumedho has continued to develop it as a central method of meditation, ranking alongside such classical forms of practice as mindfulness of breathing and investigation of the body. The Buddha’s encouragement for his students was to use skilful means that are effective in freeing the heart. Since this form of meditation seems to be very supportive for that, despite not being included in lists of meditation practices in the Pali Canon or anthologies such as the  Visuddhimagga, it seems wholly appropriate to give it its due. For surely it is the freedom of the heart that is the purpose of all the practices that are done – and that freedom is the final arbiter of what is useful, and therefore good.

The second of the terms that Ajahn Sumedho has given particular meaning to here is ‘intuitive awareness.’ As with the sound of silence there are many places in the talks contained here, particularly in the talk ‘Intuitive Awareness’ itself, where he elucidates the ways in which he is using this term. However, it might be helpful here to reflect a little on its usage, just to clarify that in relation to other ways of employing the same words.

There are numerous places throughout the book where, when the phrase ‘intuitive awareness’ is used, the words ‘ sati-sampajañña’ are used immediately after, meaning that the former is a translation of the latter. The quality of  sati-sampajañña/intuitive awareness is used to refer to part of a continuum which begins with  sati, the raw mindful cognizance of an object; the second element being  sati-sampajañña, referring to the mindful, intuitive awareness of an object within its context; the final element is ‘ satipaññā’ – usually translated as ‘mindfulness-and-wisdom’ – which refers to the appreciation of an object in respect to its essential nature as transitory, unsatisfactory and not-self. Ajahn Chah used to characterize the relationship between these three elements as being like the hand, arm and body:  sati is that which picks things up,  sampajañña is like the arm that enables the hand to get to the required place,  paññā is the body which provides it with the  life force and the directive element.

Throughout these talks Ajahn Sumedho develops the connection between the terms ‘ sati-sampajañña’ and ‘intuitive awareness.’ In so doing he is endeavouring to clarify and expand the common renderings of  sampajañña as ‘clear comprehension’ or even ‘self awareness.’ His chief concern is, as he states on p. 15, that this phrase does not give a sense of the true broadness of that clarity. Thus he is experimenting with an expression that conveys a deliberately expansive quality and that includes the element of mystery; for it is important for the English wording also to imply an attunement of the heart to experiences that the thinking mind cannot understand or that, as he says, are ‘foggy, confused or uncertain.’ The word ‘intuitive’ is used because it perfectly conveys the mixture of a genuine apprehension of reality, yet also that the reason why things are the way they are might not be at all apparent.

The final, and perhaps most significant, term to look at in this light is ‘consciousness’. The Pali word ‘ viññāṇa’ is almost invariably translated into English as ‘consciousness’. In Buddhist psychology ‘ viññāṇa’ generally means a discriminative consciousness that acts via one of the six sense-doors: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body or mind. It means the act of cognizing a knowable object. However, this is not the only way that the Buddha uses the term.

As Ajahn Sumedho mentions on p. 106, there are two places in the discourses where a substantially different set of qualities are associated with the term. The phrase that he quotes,  viññāṇaṁ anidassanaṁ anantaṁ sabbato pabhaṁ, comes in part from Dīgha Nikāya 11.85, in the Kevaddha Sutta, and in part at Majjhima Nikāya 49.25, in the Brahmanimantanika Sutta. The former passage comes at the end of a colourful and lengthy teaching tale recounted by the Buddha. He tells of a monk in the mind of whom the question arises: ‘I wonder where it is that the four great elements – Earth, Water, Fire and Wind – cease without remainder?’ Being a skilled meditator, the bhikkhu in question enters a state of absorption and ‘the path to the gods becomes open to him.’ He begins by putting his question to the first gods he meets, the retinue of the Four Heavenly Kings, the guardians of the world; they demur, saying that they do not know the answer, but that the Four Kings themselves probably do: he should ask them. He does, they do not and the search continues. Onward and upward through successive heavens he travels, continually being met with the same reply: ‘We do not know but you should try asking ...’ and is referred to the next higher level of the celestial hierarchy. Patiently enduring the protracted process of this cosmic chain of command, he finally arrives in the presence of the retinue of Mahā Brahmā, he puts the question to them; once again they fail to produce an answer but they assure him that The Great Brahmā Himself, should He deign to manifest, is certain to provide him with the resolution he seeks. Sure enough, before too long, Mahā Brahmā appears but he too does not know the answer, and he chides the monk for being a disciple of the Buddha yet not going to his own teacher with such a question.

When he finally meets the Buddha and asks him, he receives the reply: ‘But, monk, you should not ask your question in this way: “Where do the four great elements – Earth, Water, Fire and Wind – cease without remainder?” Instead, this is how the question should have been put:

“Where do earth, water, fire and wind,And long and short, and fine and coarse,Pure and impure no footing find?Where is it that both  nāma (name) and  rūpa (form) fade out,Leaving no trace behind?”‘And the answer is:“In the awakened consciousness –the invisible, the limitless, radiant.[ viññāṇaṁ anidassanaṁ anantaṁ sabbato pabhaṁ]There it is that earth, water, fire and wind,And long and short, and fine and coarse,Pure and impure no footing find.There it is that both  nāma and  rūpa fade out,Leaving no trace behind.When discriminative consciousness comes to its limit,They are held in check therein.”’

The term  anidassana-viññāṇa has been translated in various other ways: ‘where consciousness is signless’ (Walshe), ‘the consciousness that makes no showing’ (Ñāṇamoli) and, most helpfully, by Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, in his book  Concept and Reality (p. 59), as ‘non-manifestative consciousness.’ It is unlikely that the English language has a single term that can accurately convey the constellation of meanings that  anidassana-viññāṇa possesses, however it is generally this set of qualities that Ajahn Sumedho is referring to when he uses the simple term ‘consciousness’.

As Ajahn Sumedho also says, on p. 106, it is ‘a mouthful of words that point to this state of natural consciousness, this reality.’ So it should be borne in mind by the reader that, most of the time, he is quite deliberately using the single word ‘consciousness’ as a shorthand for ‘ anidassana-viññāṇa.’ Naturally, the word is also used in various places with its customary scriptural meaning of discriminative cognizing, as well as in the sense of ‘re-birth consciousness’ (patisandhi-viññāṇa), for example, on p. 109, ‘When we are born into a physical birth, we have consciousness within this form …’. In addition, Ajahn Sumedho also occasionally uses the word in the ordinary English sense, i.e. describing the state of not being unconscious, being awake and aware of one’s surroundings and identity.

An obvious parallel to Ajahn Sumedho’s usage of the word ‘consciousness’ is the Thai phrase ‘ poo roo’ as employed by many of the Forest Ajahns. The literal translation is: ‘ poo’ = ‘person’ + ‘ roo’ = ‘knowing’. It has been variously rendered as ‘knowing’, ‘the one who knows’, ‘awareness’ or even ‘Buddha wisdom.’ It is also a term that can be used to convey a large spectrum of meanings from, at one end, the simple act of the mind cognizing an object (as in classical definitions of  viññāṇa), through varying levels of refinement (as in being the witness of phenomena arising and passing away), up to the utterly unobstructed awareness of the fully awakened heart.

So it can mean everything from simple ‘cognition’ to ‘the wisdom of a fully enlightened Buddha.’ And, just as with Ajahn Sumedho’s employment of the word ‘consciousness’, it is necessary with the term ‘ poo roo’ to look at the context, and to take into account the favourite expressions of the ajahn in question, in order to discern the intended nuances of meaning – ergo, reader be aware!

Since there are such a variety of meanings contingent upon the one word ‘consciousness’ in this book, it would thus be wise for the reader always to reflect on the circumstance that the word is being used in. In this light, it might be felt by some that it would have been more helpful not to have used ‘consciousness’ in such a broad range of ways, that perhaps sticking to more familiar terminology might have been easier on the listeners and readers – perhaps using a word like ‘ citta’, the heart, as defining the agent of pure awareness, instead of ‘ anidassana viññāṇa’ – however, this is not the way that such organic and freestyle methods of teaching usually work.

It has been the explicit aim of the editors of this book to maintain the spontaneous and informal style of Ajahn Sumedho’s spoken words. All of his talks are extemporaneous, taking shape as they are expressed according to the needs of the listeners present. And part of this methodology of instruction is that it often demands that the listener/reader expand their range of view of what the teaching and practice is, and how certain words can and should be used. Furthermore, this spontaneous and direct method of expounding the Dhamma encourages the participants to allow themselves to be changed by what they see and hear, rather than judge it according to whether or not it complies with familiar and favoured patterns of thinking. Are we going to complain to Van Gogh that ‘A church built like that would never stand up!’? Probably not …

So, as you, the reader, wend your way through these pages and explore this small gallery of Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings, it is our fond hope that you find here words and images that help to awaken and free the heart. Whatever is thus meaningful and good, please take it and install it in your life, and whatever is not, please leave it and pass it by in peace.

Amaro Bhikkhu