## Suffering Should be Welcomed

One of the epithets for the Buddha that we chant is lokavidū, ‘knower of the world.’ Of course we can see that this is a quality of the Buddha. But something much more practical than chanting the positive qualities of somebody called ‘Buddha’ is to reflect on what ‘the world’ is. This entails contemplating or reflecting on life as we experience it, rather than describing how life should be. If we’re rationalists, then we have theories about how things should be. But in reflective awareness we’re noticing how things are.

When we become aware of the breath, breathing is like this. We’re not saying you should breathe a certain way, as if there’s some standard of breathing that is ideal that we must all strive for. We contemplate the experience of being sensitive. When we begin to notice the fact that this body that we’re in – with its eyes, ears, nose and tongue – is sensitive, and that sensitivity is like this, then we’re looking inward. What is it to be sensitive? We’re looking at and noticing what it is to feel, to see, to hear, to smell, to taste or touch, to think, to remember. We can have ideas about being sensitive – ‘our’ sensitivity – or we can try and make ourselves insensitive because of seeing it as a weakness. To some people, to be too sensitive is such a sign; but we’re not placing any judgement on sensitivity – just noticing that it’s like this.

As we notice the world that we live in – the environment, the way it is – we find that it leads towards recognizing the impermanent nature of our conscious experience, how things arise and cease, begin and end. This is ‘knowing the world,’ not judging the world according to some standard, but seeing that the world is like this; it’s sensitive. The world is about birth and death, about meeting and parting, coming and going, good and bad, right and wrong, beauty and ugliness, and all the various gradations of experience and qualities that we are subject to in this form. Even though this seems to be an obvious reality when you recognize it, how many people are really aware of the world in terms of experience? We usually interpret it in a personal way. The habitual pattern is to interpret it all in terms of personal limitations, personal feelings or personal ideas. In noticing the world as it is, we’re seeing that it is not a personal thing. A person is a creation of the mind to which we are bound if we don’t awaken. If we just operate within the emotional conditioning we have, then we see it in terms of, ‘This is happening to me,’ or ‘I am good. I am bad,’ and so on.

It’s important to recognize and know that the world is the world. It’s a very strong experience. Having a human body is a continuous experience of being irritated. Contemplate what consciousness is in such a form as a human body, which is made up from the four elements of earth, water, fire and air. From the time you are born, the moment you’re out of your mother’s womb, you start screaming. From that moment on, sensitivity, impingement and irritations come through this sensitive form until it dies. So contemplate what birth into this world is; I encourage you to do this rather than to judge it according to any ideals or ideas that you might have. This is called the state of awakened awareness.

To ‘wake up’ means to know the world as it is; it’s not about judging the world. If we have ideas about how the world should be, then the way it’s often seen through our critical mind is that ‘it shouldn’t be.’ When we see how countries should be, governments should be, parents, partners or whatever should be, then we are coming from ideals, usually quite high standards of, ‘If everything were perfect …’. But this realm’s perfection doesn’t lie in taking conditioned experience to some kind of peak moment. Peak moments are just that; they’re wonderful in their way, but they’re not sustainable. The flow and movement of our life is around the changingness of the conditioned realm. In this conscious form, that ‘changingness’ impinges on us; we’re involved in it, we’re immersed in it.

Notice how irritating it is just to be able to see, hear, taste, smell and touch. There’s always something that isn’t quite right. It’s too cold or too hot, we have a headache or backache; unwanted noises, odours and suchlike impinge or come into contact with this form. As a result, we experience its beauty, its ugliness, pleasure and pain. But even pleasure is irritating when you think about it. We like pleasure, but having a lot of pleasure is also exhausting and irritating. This is not a criticism; it’s just noticing that having a human body is like this; breathing is like this; consciousness is like this.

Consider how sensitive we are in relation to words and thoughts. One can say things and upset everybody just through a certain tone of voice. Using certain words can be very distressing. We sometimes remember things of the past that are pleasant or unpleasant; even get neurotic through being totally obsessed in the present with something we shouldn’t have done twenty years ago. There may be the experience of a lot of guilt, remorse or self-aversion because of past mistakes or unskilful acts. We can drop ourselves into real states of depression and despair.

Being born as a human being is a real challenge in terms of how to use this experience of birth, this human experience, this sensitive state that we’re living in. Some people think about committing suicide: ‘Just get it over with’ – it’s too hard to bear, too much to stand – a lifetime of this continuous irritation and guilt, remorse, and fear of the unknown. It can be so utterly depressing that we think it’s better to kill ourselves. Or, as the Buddha encouraged us, we can wake up to it, learn from it, see it as an opportunity, as a challenge, as something to learn from. We can develop wisdom in terms of the conditions and the experiences we have in this life, which are not guaranteed to always be the best. Many of us have had to experience all kinds of frustrations, disappointments, disillusionments and failures. Of course, if we take that personally, we want to end it all very quickly. But if we put all this in the context of knowing the world as the world, we can take anything. We have incredible abilities to learn from even the most unfair and miserable, painful and nasty conditions. These are not obstructions to enlightenment; the issue is whether we use them to awaken or not.

Some people think that it’s good kamma to have an easy ride, to be born with wealthy parents and high status, beautiful appearance, intelligence, an easy life, all the benefits, all the blessings, all the good things. It’s good merit, good pāramī, or virtuous qualities. But when I look at my own life, incredible challenges have come that have shaken me, have really upset me, disappointed me to the point where I have contemplated suicide: ‘I just want to get this over with. I don’t want to spend more and more years in this realm. I can’t take it.’ But awakening to that, I realized that I’m quite willing to take what life presents and to learn from it. That’s the challenge: seeing this as an opportunity that we have as human beings, as conscious beings.

Now, the teachings of the Lord Buddha are pointing to this. They’re to awaken you rather than condition you. It’s not a matter of trying to grasp them as doctrinal positions to take hold of, but as expedient means to develop and encourage awakened awareness, mindfulness, intuition. Rather than fear sensitivity, really open to it: be fully sensitive rather than endlessly trying to protect yourself from possible pain or misfortune.

Knowing the world as the world is not a resignation in a negative way – ‘Oh, you know how the world is!’ – as if it’s bad, that there’s something wrong with it. That’s not knowing the world as the world. ‘Knowing’ is a matter of studying and taking an interest, investigating, examining experience, and really being willing to look at and feel the negative side of experience. It’s not about seeking pleasurable experiences but about seeing even your most disappointing ones, your worst failures, as opportunities to learn, as a chance to awaken. That’s why in Buddhism, ageing, sickness, disabilities and loss are not seen as things to fear and despise, but as ‘devadūtas’; ‘dūta’ means a messenger, ‘deva’ is ‘angelic’ or ‘heavenly’. So these devadūtas are heavenly messengers sent to warn us; they tap us on the shoulder and say, ‘Wake up!’

A Christian asked me once if we had angels in Buddhism. ‘We have angels in Christianity – all kinds of white and beautiful beings that play harps. They’re radiant, light beings.’ I replied, ‘Well, Buddhist angels are not that way. They’re old age, sickness and death!’ But there is a fourth devadūta:the samaṇa, a monk or nun, the human being who is having spiritual realizations. This always interested me because I thought it was quite amusing seeing an old person as an angel, the sick, the mentally ill, corpses, or monks and nuns as devadūtas. In looking at the shaven heads and the saffron robes, this is seeing people in terms of devadūtas rather than monks and nuns, senior and junior and all that. When we do that it gets into personality view or sakkāya-diṭṭhi. Do we see each other actually helping one another to awaken, or do we see each other as a person? ‘This monk is like this and that nun is like that.’ We can either see it in a worldly way or just change the perspective to seeing others as devadūtas.

You can see old people as devadūtas. Like me: I’ll be sixty-seven in a few days. Not only will I be a devadūta on the level of a samaṇa, but an old man too. As I get sick and senile, I’ll be even more of a devadūta; and when I’m dead, I’ll be four all in one! Just reflecting in this way we can see how to use life – the malleability of our human mind is endless. We can be so set and conditioned by dualistic thinking, which we get from our cultural background. For example, as a result of coming from a Christian background I was brought up with a dualistic way of looking at everything. Things were absolutely right or wrong, good or evil. These were fixed ways of looking at everything. You had a very limited use of your mind, because it tended to move between these two extremes.

Some of the Buddhist meditation exercises use visualization. For instance, we contemplate the thirty-two parts of the body. I remember when I was first faced with this in Thailand, I kept wanting to think of the thirty-two parts of the body as being physiologically accurate according to Western science. Contemplating my own thirty-two parts, it was easier for me to find a book on anatomy and look at a picture. But to contemplate the reality of those organs, and the conditions existing here and now in this form that I call myself, the thing I assume to be me, is a different use of learning. It requires us to flex the mind a bit.

I was talking to a monk last week about how difficult it sometimes is to see yourself in terms of positive qualities, because we’re so used to seeing ourselves in terms of the negative, what’s wrong, what the faults are. I notice especially with Western people, Europeans and Americans, that we spend so much time criticizing ourselves and dwelling on what we feel is wrong with us. Then we think it’s even wrong to admit our good qualities. I used to feel I was being honest when I was admitting my weaknesses and faults, but if I admitted my virtues, that would be bragging. Here in Britain, it’s very bad taste to brag and tell people how wonderful you are, how much money you make, how many important degrees or titles you have. In Thailand, some monks have name-cards with all their titles on them – BA, MA, PhD, Chao Khun, Head of Province, Vice President of the World Fellowship of Buddhists and World Congress of Buddhists, Trustee to this and that – there it’s quite all right to present yourself in terms of your accomplishments. But here we think that’s bad taste; it’s embarrassing. In an English home you never see people putting their framed university degrees up on the walls. They would be too embarrassed because it’s like boasting. There is a sense of modesty here in Britain – which is quite lovely in many ways – but it can be taken to the extreme where you have no way of acknowledging any goodness in yourself or appreciate your own successes, virtues and good qualities.

Are we going to become inflated egotistical monsters if we admit that we love good things? Why did I become a bhikkhu? Why would I choose to live a celibate life in this monastic order? I could give you reasons like, ‘I’ve got to shape up and get my act together. I can’t do it any other way. I have to do something in order to make myself do it.’ I can look at it in terms of weakness and inability, that I need the support from external conditions because I can’t do it by myself. But I can also look at it in terms of being attracted to what is good, virtuous and beautiful. Both perspectives can have their points to make. I can be fascinated by lower things and the darker side of life. It’s not that I’m so good I just gravitate to everything that’s light and beautiful; I’ve certainly had my fascinations for that which isn’t. But I would say it’s something of a character tendency that my preference leans towards the light and the good, the true and the beautiful. This is the movement that I’m interested in, moving in this direction. I see this as something that’s very good in my character, something to respect.

Putting it in terms of personal qualities, it’s about learning to be honest, to admit to and make a conscious appreciation of your own humanity and individuality. It helps give you the confidence that you don’t have if you’re obsessed, over-interested or too committed to being critical and seeing yourself through negative perceptions. This is being able to use our critical mind, our discriminative abilities and our thoughts, not just to analyze and compare one thing with another, but to examine and investigate in terms of experience. We awaken to the breath – it’s like this. We awaken to the sensitive state we’re in – it’s like this. We awaken to the irritations that we experience as conditions that contact and irritate our senses, and to our own obsessions and emotional habits, whatever they might be, putting them in perspective rather than seeing them as something to get rid of. It’s something to awaken to, a change from pushing away, resisting and denying, to moving towards awakening, accepting and welcoming.

In the First Noble Truth, the Buddha proclaimed that there is dukkha, suffering. It is put into the context of a Noble Truth rather than a dismal reality. If we look at it as a dismal reality, what happens? ‘Life is suffering, it’s all just suffering. You get old, get sick and then die. You have to lose all your friends. “All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will become separated from me.”1 That’s all it’s about; it’s just dukkha from beginning to end.’ There’s nothing noble in that. It’s pessimistic and depressing seeing it in terms of ‘I don’t like it. I don’t want suffering. What a bad joke; what a lousy joke God played on us creating this mess, and me being born into it. What am I living for, just to get old, get sick and die?’ Of course, that’s depressing. That’s not a Noble Truth. You’re creating a problem around the way things are. With a Noble Truth ‘there is suffering,’ and the advice, the prescription to deal with this suffering, is to welcome it, understand it, open to it, admit it, and begin to notice and accept it. This gives rise to the willingness to embrace and learn from that which we don’t like and don’t want: the pain, the frustration and the irritation, whether it’s physical, mental or emotional.

To understand suffering is to open to it. When we say, ‘We understand suffering because it’s …’ that is rationalizing it, but that’s not understanding. Instead, it’s welcoming and embracing the suffering that we are experiencing – our frustration, our despair, our pain, the irritation, the boredom, fears and desires – just welcoming, opening, accepting. Then this is a Noble Truth. Our humanity, then, is being noble; it’s an ariyan truth. This word ariya means ‘noble’. What is this English word ‘noble’? It’s a kind of grand quality; it rises up. If you’re noble, you rise up to things. You don’t just say, ‘Oh, life is misery and I want to hide away from it. I can’t bear it.’ There’s nothing noble in that.

If you’re brought up as Christian, you find yourself blaming suffering on God: ‘God, why did you create this mess? It’s your fault.’ I used to feel furious with God. ‘If I were God, I would have created a much better situation than this one.’ As a child I remember thinking that if I were God I wouldn’t have created pain. You fall down and hurt yourself and you think, ‘Why does God allow this? Why did He create a realm where there is so much pain? If I were God and I created the world, I wouldn’t have created pain.’ Or is pain a Noble Truth? Is old age a Noble Truth? Are loss, separation and all these experiences that we all have in this form, in this human realm, Noble Truths? Are we seeing things in terms of complaining and blaming, or in terms of a Noble Truth? This is what I’m pointing to.

We can look at things in different ways. We can choose. We’re not just stuck with one program and being its victim. If the only program we have is from the culture and family we’re born into, sometimes it might not be a very good program, and sometimes it’s all right. But still, why should we consider ourselves as limited to that experience alone when we have this opportunity to explore, to investigate reality and know in a direct way? Enlightenment is not something remote and impossible. You can see it in terms of some abstract state that you hold up and aim for but don’t think you’ll ever achieve. If I depended on my personality, I couldn’t do anything. I’d never hope to get enlightened because my personality can’t possibly conceive of myself as a person who could be enlightened.

My personality is conditioned to think of myself in terms of what’s wrong with me, coming from a competitive society where you are very much aware of who’s better and who’s worse, who’s above and who’s below. I can’t trust that. My personal habits are conditioned things, they’re not flexible in themselves. If you just attach to or interpret experience through those perceptions and never learn to look at things in any other way, then you’re stuck with a limited view, and that can be a depressing way to live your life.

We can begin to wake up and see beyond the rigid, puritanical dualism, or the initial programs we acquire through our family and social background. Trust in your own intuitive awakened sense. Don’t trust in your views and opinions about anything – about yourself, about Buddhism or the world – for these views are oftentimes biased. We get biased views about each other: we have racial prejudices, class identities, ethnic biases and feelings of social superiority. These are not to be trusted.

We can look at things in different ways. We don’t always have to look at something from the conditioning we have acquired. When the Buddha talks about the Buddha-mind, it’s flexible and malleable; it’s universal. We can see things in so many different ways. The mind has a radiant quality to it. Consciousness has a radiance; it has a light itself. When we begin to let go of always limiting ourselves through the distortions of our conditioned mental states, then we begin to understand, to see things as they really are, to know the Dhamma – enlightenment. This is not something distant, remote and impossible, unless you want to hold to those views from a personal attitude about them. You can be holding these perceptions so high that they are way beyond your personal ability to achieve them. This is because you haven’t awakened to what you’re doing. You’re merely operating from a conditioned view of everything.

There is dukkha, suffering, and dukkha should be welcomed. This is my new interpretation. The usual translation is ‘dukkha should be understood,’ and my new rendering of it is ‘dukkha should be welcomed.’ Try that one. You can experiment with these different words. You don’t have to think, ‘Pali scriptures say “understand”, they don’t say “welcome”.’ Pali scriptures don’t say ‘understand’. They use a Pali word that we translate as ‘understand’. Maybe we don’t understand what ‘understand’ means. Did you ever think about that? Maybe we don’t understand our own language. We’re so limited to a particular narrow view of the word ‘understand’ that we can’t really expand it. If we have a broader view, then we can experiment with the words and observe the effect.

So if I say ‘welcoming’ is the real translation for this, and anyone who goes back to using ‘understand’ is somehow not right, then that is getting into another rigid, arrogant approach. I’m not interested in proving I’m right, that my translations are the best, but just seeing how they work, what the effect is in the here-and-now. I am sharing this as a way of encouraging you to have that right and freedom to know for yourself. You don’t always have to try and fit yourself into views and opinions, even of our tradition with its orthodox forms or definitions, which are our particular group’s way of looking at things.

‘There is dukkha, and dukkha should be welcomed. Dukkha has been welcomed.’ What is that like? Try that one. I don’t know if it works for you, but it does for me – because my character tendency is to push dukkha away. That’s my conditioning, my personality. ‘Suffering? Push it away; don’t want it.’ I see somebody suffering and I don’t want to go near them, I want to push away from them. Someone comes to me with a problem – ‘Ajahn Sumedho, I’ve got a problem’ – I push away; I don’t want a problem. This is my character tendency, to resist. I don’t want to know about the suffering. Tell me about the good things. ‘How are you today?’ ‘I’m fine, Ajahn Sumedho. I just love it here at Amaravati. I love being a monk. I adore the Dhamma and the Theravada form and the Vinaya (monastic discipline). I love the whole thing.’ Oh, that makes me feel so good. Tell me more. And I go to somebody else: ‘How are you this morning?’ ‘Ugh! This life is such a dreary, miserable thing. I’m fed up. I want to disrobe.’ I don’t want to hear that; don’t tell me that.

We can go around trying to get people to make us feel good. ‘Tell me the good things, because that makes me feel good. Don’t tell me the bad stuff, because that makes me feel bad. I don’t want to feel bad. I don’t want suffering; I don’t welcome it, I want to get rid of it. Therefore, I’m going to try and live my life so that I can get as much of the good stuff as I can, and push away the bad stuff.’ But in this new translation, ‘There’s suffering, and suffering should be welcomed,’ it changes things. You see the suffering – your own, or others’ problems, difficulties and so forth – as things to welcome rather than as things to run from or push away.

We’ve been on retreat for the past week. I really like formal practice, I like to sit here and face the shrine. I like the Temple; it’s a very pleasant place to sit. I sit with this triangular cushion that supports the spine, so I can sit comfortably for long periods of time. I look at the shrine and the mind goes still and quiet, all the things on it bring peace and calm. There are candles and incense and the statue of the Buddha, things that aren’t dukkha for me. They inspire, they’re pleasing, they aren’t irritating and they do not cause me unpleasant feelings. If I don’t particularly want to look at them, I can just close my eyes and not look at anything. But when I turn around and face you – what happens? It brings up a sense of there being so many possibilities. All these different people, some of whom I don’t even know, some others I think I know. I’ve got views about some of you – you’re like this and you’re like that. Each person will bring up certain memories, some pleasant, some unpleasant. Some people have different ways of moving and acting and saying things that bring up different feelings in my mind, in my consciousness. If I think, ‘Oh, I can’t bear this,’ then the world is like that. I have to immediately turn around again and look at the shrine. If, on the other hand, when I’m looking at the shrine I begin to allow the awareness to take me to non-grasping, to the reality of non-attachment – if I really know this, rather than merely depend on the lack of stimulation for it – then instead of having to turn away from the community, I can turn towards the community. Awakened awareness is not dependent on facing the shrine. In this way we’re beginning to awaken to reality rather than to a conditioned experience that we become very dependent upon.

We talk of taking refuge in Sangha. We can define Sangha in terms of the ‘four pairs, the eight kinds of noble beings.’2 How many of us fit into that description? How many of your egos can think of yourself as sotāpanna-magga, sotāpanna-phala, sakadāgāmi-magga, sakadāgāmi-phala, anāgāmi-magga, anāgāmi-phala, arahatta-magga, arahatta-phala? Which one are you? How can I take refuge in ‘four pairs and eight kinds of noble beings’? It’s very abstract. Are these sages ideal beings somewhere or are they here, this monk or that nun? What is refuge in Sangha then? Do we want to make it abstract? Is it up to me to decide who’s a sotāpanna, sakadāgāmi and so forth, to figure out who I can take refuge with? Then it’s just a matter of my ego again. Here I am – this person, trying to decide what somebody else is.

It’s taking these words like Sangha and making them work for you. Make it practical. We have the same refuge; we’re the Sangha. Our refuge is in Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha, not in personal attitudes or preferences, habits or views and opinions. When we see each other in terms of Sangha or as devadūtas, we’re looking at each other in a way that begins to appreciate, respect and get beyond personal preference, personal views, personal reactivity. But we’re not trying to annihilate any of that, because the dukkha we welcome is all this personal reactivity. Like why we feel angry, why we feel jealous, why we feel rejected or suchlike – we’re not trying to dismiss it. Instead, as we trust in this awakened state, then we can welcome our own foolish feelings or neurotic habits in terms of a Noble Truth rather than as personal faults.

1 This phrase appears in more than one of the recollections frequently chanted by our communities.

2 Four pairs, eight kinds of noble beings: the four stages of enlightenment are sotāpanna (stream-enterer), sakadāgāmi (once-returner), anāgāmi (non-returner), arahant (fully enlightened person). The four pairs, eight kinds of noble beings are one realizing the path of stream-entry, one realizing the fruition of stream-entry; one realizing the path of once-returner, one realizing the fruition of once-returner; one realizing the path of non-returner, one realizing the fruition of non-returner; one realizing the path of arahantship, one realizing the fruition of arahantship (an enlightened being).