## Observing Attachment

Consciousness is what we are all experiencing right now  – it is the bonding experience we all have at this moment. Consciousness is about the realm of form. We experience consciousness through form. When we contemplate the four elements – earth, water, fire, air – along with space and consciousness, this is a totality of experience in terms of an individual human being. The physical condition of a body and the physical realm in which we live is a combination of these four elements, combined with space and consciousness. We can contemplate the four elements in our own body as a way of looking at it where one does not see it as a personal identity or as something belonging to oneself. Space and consciousness have no boundaries; they’re infinite. Consciousness, then, is what we’re using in meditation in order to contemplate the way things are.

We get confused because consciousness is not something we can get hold of in the way that we can with earth, water, fire and air or conditions of the mind like thoughts and emotions. Because we are conscious we can actually be aware of thoughts and emotions, or the body as it exists and manifests at the present moment.

Sometimes we think of consciousness in a limited way, as simply arising through contact via the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind – just in terms of sensory consciousness. In this case, consciousness is limited to perceiving through the senses. But it is possible to begin to recognize consciousness that is unattached to the senses, which is what I point to when I refer to the sound of silence. When you begin to notice that sound, there is consciousness that is unattached. As you sustain awareness with the sound of silence, you find you can begin to reflect and get perspective on your thoughts, emotions, feelings, sense activity and experience – which all arise in consciousness in the present.

It is important to recognize that this is something really wonderful that we can do. The whole point of the samaṇa life is aimed at this kind of realization. Of course, obstruction comes with our commitment to the delusions that we create: the strong sense of being a separate self, identification with the body as being who we are, and the emotional habits, thoughts and feelings by which we create ourselves. We then derive a sense of having a personality that we tend to identify with and allow to push us around. This is why I encourage you to rest and relax into the awareness that comes when you recognize the sound of silence.

Just rest in this state of openness and receptivity. Don’t attach to the idea of it. You can attach to the idea of the sound of silence and of attaining something with it, or keep creating some false illusions around it. That’s not it. It’s not a matter of trying to make anything out of it, but of fully opening to this present moment in a way that is unattached.

This recognition of non-attachment is something you know through your awareness rather than through a description. All one can say about it are things like ‘don’t attach to anything,’ and ‘let go of everything.’ But then people attach and say, ‘We shouldn’t be attached to anything.’ They attach to the idea of non-attachment! We are so committed to thinking and trying to figure everything out in terms of ideas, theory, technique, party line, the Theravada approach and on and on like this. We bind ourselves to the conditions, even though the teaching is about letting go or non-attachment. This is why I really encourage you to observe attachment. Trust yourself in this awareness. And, rather than holding to the views that one shouldn’t be attached, recognize attachment is like this.

In the early days I used to practise attaching to things intentionally, just so I would know what attachment is like, rather than hold some idea that I shouldn’t be attached to anything – and then in some desperate way be always trying to be detached. That would have only been self-deception, because the basic delusion that gave rise to the attachment had not been penetrated. Thinking, ‘I’m someone who is attached and I shouldn’t be’ is an attachment: ‘I am a monk who has all these attachments, these hang-ups. They’re obstructions and I shouldn’t be attached to them. I’ve got to get rid of them, let go of them.’ The attachment to that results in you fooling yourself, and endlessly disappointing yourself because you can’t do it that way – it doesn’t work. This is why I emphasize this pure state of consciousness. Now don’t just take it for granted. Don’t try to figure it out or think about it very much. Learn to just do it. Just contact this resonating sound or vibration, learn to stay with it for a count of five, or practise so that you get used to it and appreciate it. If you cultivate it, it gives you this state where you begin to be conscious without being attached, so that the conditions that arise in consciousness may be seen in the perspective of arising and ceasing.

When we let go and simply abide in pure, unattached consciousness, that is also the experience of unconditioned love. Pure consciousness accepts everything. It is not a divisive function; it doesn’t have preferences of any sort. It accepts everything and every condition for what it is – the bad, the good, the demons, anything. So when you begin to trust in it, the mettā bhāvanā practice comes alive. Rather than just spreading good thoughts and altruistic ideas, it becomes practical and very real.

What do we mean by ‘love’ anyway? To many people, love is the ultimate attachment: when you love somebody you want to possess them. Often what passes for love in modern consciousness is a strong attachment to another person, thing or creature. But if you want to apply this word to that which accepts, then you have mettā – love which is unattached, which has no preferences, which accepts and sees everything as belonging.

When you begin to trust in the awareness, the conscious moment that is infinite, then everything belongs in it. From the perspective of this conscious being, whatever arises in this consciousness is accepted and welcomed, whether it’s through the senses from the outside or from the inside – in other words, all the emotional and physical conditions that become conscious in this present moment. This sense of love, acceptance and non-judgement accepts everything you are thinking, feeling and experiencing. It allows everything to be what it is. But if we don’t allow things to be as they are, then we are trying to get something that we don’t have or get rid of something that we don’t want. So in terms of purifying the mind, consciousness is already pure. You don’t need to purify it; you don’t have to do anything.

By not holding on to the conventional view of yourself, you begin to not identify as being this person, this way, this condition, this body. These views begin to drop away; they are not the way things really are. In terms of meditation, if you trust in awareness then certain things come into consciousness: worries, resentments, self-consciousness, memories of various kinds, bright ideas or whatever. Our relationship to them is accepting, embracing, allowing. In terms of action and speech – the good, which we act on when we can, as well as the bad that we don’t – we accept both, non-critically. That to me is what love is, it’s non-critical. This applies most to what arises in my consciousness: the kamma, emotions, feelings and memories that arise in the moment. Behind it all is the sound of silence. It’s like an enormous, vast, infinite space that allows things to be what they are because everything belongs. The nature of conditions is to arise and cease; that’s the way it is. We don’t demand that they are otherwise or complain because we’d like to hold on to the good stuff and annihilate the bad. Our true nature is pure. When we begin to realize and fully trust and appreciate this, we see it’s real. It’s not theoretical, abstract or an idea – it’s reality.

Consciousness is very real. It’s not something you create. This is consciousness right now. That you are conscious is a fact, it’s just the way it is. The conditions we might be experiencing may be different. One person may be happy; another sad, confused, tired, depressed; another worrying about the future, regretting the past and so on. Who knows all of the various conditions that are going on in all of us at this moment? Only you know what is occurring in your particular experience now. Whatever it is – good or bad, whether you want it or not – it’s the way it is. So then your relationship to it must be through this purity of being, rather than through identifying with the conditioned.

You can never purify the conditioned. You can’t make yourself a pure person. That’s not where purity is. When you try to purify yourself as a person it’s a hopeless task, like trying to polish a brick to make it into a mirror. It’s demanding the impossible, which means you will fail and be disappointed. The awakened state is the original purity. In other words, you have always been pure, you have never, ever, for one moment been impure. Even if you’re a serial killer, the worst demon in the universe, you’re still pure because that purity is impossible to destroy. The problem lies not in becoming impure but in the attachment to the illusion we create in our mind: the demon is so attached to being a demon that he forgets his original purity, this presence here and now.