## Five Precepts

The Buddha teaches us that when we keep the Five Precepts – when we refrain from harming, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from using unkind speech, lying, backbiting and so on, when we refrain from taking drugs, intoxicants or substances that cloud our mind – we are actually practising generosity. The Buddha called the Precepts the five gifts:

Now, there are these five gifts, five great gifts – original, long-standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated, unadulterated from the beginning – that are not open to suspicion, will never be open to suspicion, and are unfaulted by knowledgeable contemplatives and priests. Which five?

There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones, abandoning the taking of life, abstains from taking life. In doing so, he gives  freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings.

In giving freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings, he gains a share in limitless freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, and freedom from oppression.

This is the first gift, the first great gift – original, long-standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated, unadulterated from the beginning – that is not open to suspicion, will never be open to suspicion, and is unfaulted by knowledgeable contemplatives and priests.

Anguttara Nikaya 8.39

The Buddha tells us that in observing the first precept, we are giving numberless beings freedom from fear, enmity and oppression, and in return we partake of that freedom ourselves. This is just to give a sense of how interconnected we all are and how vast is our influence in this world. He then elaborates on each of the other four precepts and shows that in observing them we are giving faultless gifts to a limitless number of beings.

No matter how disenchanted we feel with the world, this disenchantment can be turned into wise understanding of the limitations of our human life. When we have wise understanding, it can have a profound effect on other human beings and bring blessings and happiness into our lives and the lives of others. Simply by being awake and transforming the heart of Dhamma – letting go of greed, hatred, stupidity and delusion, conceit and the rest of it – we help other beings and ourselves.