## Living In Reality

When the weather is beautiful, we notice how the huma n mind is influenced and affected by the brightness of sunshine. On a sunny day in England, I always feel that the sunshine brings happiness into people’s minds, and when they’re happy they seem to get along better naturally. What happens to our minds when the clouds come? When the mind is miserable, it is difficult to connect with people.

The Buddha’s entire teaching is about finding a happiness which is different from conventional happiness. Conventional happiness gives way to misery and unsatisfactory experiences. We tend to be experts in conditioned happiness; not a stable, fundamental happiness, but a happiness dependent on things. Some of those things are healthy and helpful, but others are destructive and can lead us to misery, sickness,  addiction and obsession.

Buddhist teaching is a clear map to psychological health. The Buddha shows very clearly where the mind becomes diseased and the path that takes the mind to a state of health. There are many aspects to that path. One of the first important teachings I learned from Ajahn Sumedho was how to develop the ability to see life as it is and to simply learn from it, not to fall into the traps of judging, criticizing, wanting things to be different, feeling constantly discontented.

Remember to receive life as it is.

This is the first step towards living in reality, rather than in dreams which can easily turn into nightmares when we identify with them. If we don’t identify with the dreams, we can feel freedom in our hearts. Then we can go through both nightmares and pleasant dreams, but not need to depend on any of them to be happy. Then we experience life as it is, and let go of life – we don’t push it away, we just let it go. This is not ‘me’ doing something, it is a clear seeing. Awareness itself is what enables the mind to let go.

We use this teaching as an entry into learning, with an approach that is tolerant and accepting, benevolent and compassionate. It is not an approach that continues to divide, dissect, make judgements and criticize. It is an approach that is whole, wholesome, all-encompassing; an approach of non-contention, as Ajahn Sumedho would describe it. We are not contending with the reality of ‘now’, we are just able to see it as it is.

To see something clearly depends on certain conditions. We learn to appreciate what it means to be still. What does that mean? It simply means that you stop moving with the movements of your mind. You stop agitating yourself with that which is agitated in yourself, being confused with that which is confused within you, being unhappy with that which is unhappy inside you. When we reach the place of stopping and being still, the condition of seeing arises naturally in the mind. A seeing mind doesn’t move. It has stopped. It is here, now.

There are many different methods, techniques and teachings of meditation. Vipassana practice involves exploring the mind and seeing the result of that exploration. It leads to seeing clearly what the Buddha called the three characteristics of phenomena: everything is impermanent, everything is unsatisfactory and everything is ‘not what you are’ (anicca, dukkha, anattā). Vipassana means being able to see deeply and clearly, to know profoundly. When you see clearly, you have access to the reality of now. This is not something you imagine or have to believe; it is something you see clearly. Vipassana is an invitation to explore: ‘Is this satisfactory or unsatisfactory?’ Maybe you think you find greed or its object extremely satisfactory. On the other hand, maybe you find that the feeling of greed arising in the heart is not so pleasant and restful. The Buddha invites us to really examine the excitement of this world of desires. He draws our attention to the danger of believing in this world of sensuality and its complexities, and to really apply our attention, to question and investigate.