## ‘Awakenism’

The focus of our practice is on allowing the mind to calm down. We don’t need to worry about how many insights we will have or how many problems we will solve. We are learning how to stabilize the mind, and stabilizing the mind has nothing to do with wiping out the mind. It is an exercise where we keep reminding ourselves to be present. As we do that, we notice how many times the mind runs away somewhere else. We learn to be with the mind. ‘Buddhism’ is really more like ‘Mindism’. The Buddha was simply awake, so you could call it ‘Awakenism’. When we think of it like that, the mind becomes really light. There are no memories attached to the word ‘awakenism’. How many websites on ‘Buddhism’ have we seen over the last twenty years? Our minds are bursting at the seams with knowledge about ‘Buddhism’, right?

I like simple things. ‘Buddh’ means ‘awake’, so we can start with that. We don’t have to go into a whole commentary about Paticcasamuppada. Sometimes we accidentally counteract the process of awakening by filling up our mind with more thoughts. We can be very attached to thought. Particularly in this culture, we tend to believe that everything can be solved through thinking. We can become completely besotted with thought and strongly loyal to the thinking mind. But in Thailand, if you start thinking too much, people say you’re a bit mad.

We don’t try to wipe the mind clean; we just allow it to settle. When the water in a lake is still, you can see to the bottom. Nobody can tell us what we will see at the bottom of the lake of our mind. There may be old cans of beer, rotting bicycles or bodies of cars and dead animals. We shouldn’t imagine that when we calm the mind we’re not going to see all the rotten memories, miserable thoughts and so on. Calming and stabilizing the mind facilitates seeing, and seeing can lead to understanding – not through thinking, but by allowing the wisdom factor to appear. Insight doesn’t necessarily have to do with thinking. We might suddenly drop the thought and realize that understanding grows. For a minute we can drop the thoughts that have been clogging up the brain and jump into the void. Actually, it is not a ‘void’. It is a jump out of our security zone. And it is not a big jump, it is just a freedom jump, a loving jump.

The mind that is not attached has enormous potential. It is vast and powerful. We don’t always trust it because it can be difficult and uncomfortable to walk the way of ‘not knowing’. Ajahn Sumedho was very strong in this respect. He taught me and many other people to develop a practice of not knowing, training the mind to be at peace with not knowing. When we see the mind following its ordinary, habitual ways – ‘don’t know.’ ‘Don’t know’ is very good for cutting through doubt, and doubt is one of the Five Hindrances. Not sure whether to do this or that, not sure whether or not Buddhism is good for me, whether I should go with this person or that person, whether I should sit on a chair or cushion – doubt can take on any form. It can be existential: do I exist or not? Am I really as I appear? Don’t know.

Doubt is a mechanism in the brain, but doubt is not ‘you’. When you stop following doubts, you might discover that you have a way of doing things which doesn’t need doubt. Questioning and investigating are not the same as doubt. Questioning is asking, ‘Is that true?’ There is a way of questioning that brings wisdom into the mind. When we question without expecting an answer, it may be that questioning leads us to ‘don’t know.’

When the mind is constantly trying to solve problems that it can’t solve properly, we can find ourselves in a very small world, a world that is tight, predictable. It is very important to be with the open mind, the ‘don’t-know’ mind. When we say ‘don’t know’, nothing has changed externally, but internally we have suddenly stopped sticking to the idea that we should know, that we must know – and we’ve also stopped our loyalty to the opposite idea, the despair of worrying that we will never know, that we are not capable of knowing, that we need to find somebody else to know for us. And if we search for somebody else, unfortunately we don’t always find the wisest person. Sometimes we are lucky, but we don’t always meet a good adviser.

So we sit quietly on our cushions and just notice. We sit with the breath, with the body, with the sound of silence. These little devices, these skilful means, these objects of meditation are not a pathway to immediate enlightenment. They just calm the waves in the mind. For some people, having an object of meditation doesn’t always work. Some people feel happier when they just let their mind be spacious. If that works for you, use that comfortable spaciousness as an object, as a way of reminding you to be present.

When you meditate, you don’t have to be anywhere special. You can just sit. Feel the body sitting and gently bring your attention to your object. This is a discipline. As soon as we try to discipline our mind, to focus it on just one thing, it will start buzzing. It may start remembering other ‘skilful means’ that you’ve used in the past and try to convince you that they are better than your present object of meditation. Then you might start jumping around from object to object until you gently direct your mind to return to the original object. If it is a well-trained mind, it will follow your orders. This is what we call a ‘disciplined’ or ‘trained mind’, which does what you want. If it is not trained yet, if it is restless or agitated, start training it gently but firmly, like a child. Bring it back to your object of meditation.

When the mind is still, you may notice that the rest of your life is not particularly still. ‘The mind that is still’ is just another way of saying ‘the mind that is present.’ You may be present with laziness, carelessness, wilfulness, confusion. Don’t worry about results. Meditating with a goal in mind creates a duality: there is ‘me’ and there is ‘the goal’. Work on letting go of this idea of a goal, but do it without expectations. Our goal-oriented mind doesn’t stop just because we say ‘don’t expect anything’, but at least we begin to see its expectations. We begin to see the contents of all those unskilful kilesas, miserable, afflictive, harmful mental states. Kilesas have many names, and once we can put a name on them we can recognize them much more easily, and then we can catch them and avoid acting on them. We can actually see that we have the power and resources and means to restrain ourselves from doing something unskilful. It is good to be able to recognize these things.

We think we can’t stop re-creating bad habits. But we can stop. That is the joy of our practice – we begin to see the possibility of not acting or speaking in a way that keeps us stuck in the same old ruts. A mind that is caught in its own ruts is depressed. We are meant to be free. It is really important to have this perspective and to find joy. Energy in the mind is vital for experiencing joy. Most people search for joy through such things as drinking coffee, shopping, going to movies, watching television or listening to music. The Buddha’s way is to have a mind that is not dependent on these things, though it may still enjoy television, shopping or whatever. Our mind, has a beautiful potential for connecting with the joy of the heart on the way to peace and liberation. This is vital.

No goal. No expectation. We are not going anywhere. The title of Ayya Khema’s book, Being Nobody, Going Nowhere, is a skilful means in words. The mind is always going somewhere and trying to be somebody. These words are a good antidote. How many times do we catch ourselves going somewhere? Somebody says something we think is wrong and we run to correct them. I don’t mean ‘run’ as for catching a bus. I’m talking about running with our critical mind, running with our angry mind, running with our greedy mind. We run. Anger in particular not only gets you running, it gets you up to Olympic standard. It feels like a fire that is unstoppable. It took me a long time and many experiences to realize that anger is redundant. I’m not saying that I never have anger, but I have no doubt now that anger solves nothing. It hurts oneself and others. There is no wisdom in it.

Sometimes people tell me, ‘I have to express my anger. If I am not angry, I am not alive.’ I have no doubt that we feel very alive when we are banging our fists, slamming the door or kicking someone. Our depression suddenly goes away for a few minutes. But don’t trust that. It will return, and it will just keep depositing us back in the same rut. We need to be reminded of this many times. It is easy to fall into habits which, like a mental law of gravity, pull us down into well-worn furrows in the mind. That is why in some teachings you will come across references to ‘higher mind’ and ‘lower mind’. Developing the higher mind means leaving behind the mind of old habits created and conditioned through anger, greed and delusion. We let that mind go. The ‘higher mind’ is the mind of wisdom and compassion, an unselfish mind that is able to bring happiness into this world and benefit other people. It is a beautiful mind. But we mustn’t be too caught up in duality, thinking we must destroy one mind to develop another. We simply let go of the lower mind, of all the activities bound up with attachment and destructive emotions, and allow the higher mind to manifest.