## When Mind Sees Mind

The consumer society creates a dynamic in which we become more and more frustrated as we pursue things we think will make us happy one day. Eventually there comes a point when we start to notice that all the tantalizing things in the world do not bring the happiness that a human being seeks. At some point, we experience nibbida , which means ‘disenchantment’. Things that once seemed so important become meaningless; they make no sense, they seem to have no purpose. We realize that we have just been piling up more anger, stupidity, selfishness, fear, worry and so on, and that this is not what we were looking for. At some point we begin to think, ‘Ah, maybe I need something that is going to help my mind stop being reborn into the misery of clinging to mind-states, to stop continually piling up delusion, negativity and aversion.’

And finally we bump into the Buddha’s teaching.

Awakened beings don’t usually do things that make them miserable. Their lives may still have some misery, but they don’t pick it up. They don’t identify with it; they don’t make it their own. They stop and look at it; they feel, experiencing their life as it is right now, and they leave it there.

Luang Por Dun1 described the Four Noble Truths in this way: when the mind goes out, it is caught in desire. This is the cause of suffering. The fruit of the mind that goes out is suffering. When mind sees mind, this is the path. The result of mind seeing mind is nirodha, the cessation of suffering.

We cannot train the mind just by constantly accumulating knowledge about Buddhism. We have to start with our life as it is, right here, right now, in this moment. We may still be infatuated with the desire to be constantly satisfied. Detachment may not make sense yet. While in the grip of desire, we may see that life is varied and exciting, and this can make us temporarily happy or miserable. But we are blind to other aspects of life, such as the joy of peace, of clarity, of a mind that is full of understanding and wisdom, a mind that is kind, calm and compassionate. We may occasionally experience that perspective, but is it our refuge yet? Has it taken root? Or is it just passing moments, passing experiences? Perhaps the mind and body haven’t yet been transformed by these qualities. Have we seen clearly that anger is totally useless, that it harms everybody, including ourselves?

In the Fire Sermon the Buddha explains that everything is ‘on fire’: the mind is on fire, the eyes are on fire, the six senses are on fire. He used that simile to teach a group of ascetics who were fire worshippers. He explained to them that through seeing Dhamma, disenchantment arises and the mind cools down and it can eventually free itself from this fire. This ‘burning’ is the mind caught up in greed, hatred and delusion. If you have enough stress, anguish, disappointment or negativity in your life, you will know how they burn. Clinging makes us really hot, heated up with misery. The Buddha points us toward the peace of a cool mind.

The Fire Sermon takes us through the whole package of the human being on fire: burning through the six sense-consciousnesses, the six sense-doors (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind) and their objects. This is the focus of the path of practice. We look at the mind, at our body, at our humanity, our human qualities, our human life; we investigate them, we search within ourselves: ‘What is it that causes me to feel the way I feel right now?’ We don’t have to think about it. Meditation takes us straight to the immediacy of the reality of now, the reality of looking at the mind and body without extra imagery. We don’t have to read a book to learn about this, we simply look at our mind and body. Ajahn Chah often told his disciples to read the book within themselves. The book is our mind with all its stories, all its structures, constructions, memories, anticipations, hopes and so on. That is our inner book, the book we learn to read in meditation practice.

I find Luang Por Dun’s teaching of the third noble truth very helpful: ‘The mind seeing the mind is the Path.’2 I don’t have to believe it blindly; I can put it to the test, put it into practice, right here and now, by starting with mindfulness. Mindfulness is what carries us along the path of practice. It brings us straight back to the present moment where there is the possibility of being awake and aware and knowing what’s what. It is important that we see directly, not just intellectually. As long as the mind still identifies seeing with intellectual understanding and hasn’t come to the realization of Dhamma at the deeper level, it is still a bit lost. The intellectual mind is still there amid waves of doubt and anxiety, constantly moving around trying to defend one thing and reject another. The Dhamma mind is confident and trusting. It recognizes the limitation of taking refuge in the thinking mind. The thinking mind is not a waste of time, it’s just limited. The thinking mind still has the tendency to think it knows, and so it keeps falling into views. Thinking ‘I know’ is conceit. Conceit is attaching to an idea of ‘who I am.’ You might think, ‘I am a hopeless case. I can’t be a Buddhist. It’s too hard for me.’ That’s a form of conceit. Whether we think we’re superior, inferior or equal – that’s still conceit, that’s still ‘self’, ‘me’.

When we start relating without being so caught up in the attachment to ‘me’ and ‘mine’ – my mind, my position, my view – being human is really easy, and relating as human beings is not so difficult. We no longer see and experience anyone as ‘out there’. We feel each other as human bodies, feeling bodies. When we recognize this, we begin to participate in life as something bigger than just ‘me’ and ‘my’. That brings a lot of joy. We don’t have to keep on trying to control everything through fear and worry. We are able to witness the blessing of trust.

1 Luang Por Dun was one of Luang Por Mun’s disciples and a highly respected Forest monk.

2 A senior monk of the meditation tradition came to pay his respects to Luang Por Dun on the first day of the Rains Retreat in 1956. After giving him instruction and a number of teachings on profound matters, Luang Por Dun summarized the four noble truths as follows:

The mind sent outside is the origination of suffering.The result of the mind sent outside is suffering.The mind seeing the mind is the path.The result of the mind seeing the mind is the cessation of suffering.