## An Invitation to Explore

Many of you know that the goal of the Buddhist path is to reach nibbāna. But nibbāna is not actually a world or a realm or a state. It is absence, the absence of greed, hatred and delusion. It is often referred to as ‘the cooling down of the mind’. How can we conceive the absence of something? We can’t. How can we imagine nibbāna? Instead of seeking to describe it, the Buddha pointed to what we know. One thing we know is suffering. It is not difficult for a human being to realize how difficult life is – we have to toil and work to be able to eat, to keep warm, to have a home, to make and keep our friends, and to deal with the people we don’t really want in our lives anymore, such as parents with whom we maybe don’t get on, to develop relationships that may be wonderful or disastrous. Dukkha  is not very far away. It is in every corner of our life.

The opposite of dukkha  is sukha,  which means ‘happiness’ or ‘ease’. There is suffering, but there is also happiness. Both are essential aspects of human experience. When there is sukha , the human heart wants more of it. During meditation, you notice the mind is peaceful and blissful for a few minutes and there’s an immediate tendency (if the mind is untrained) to assume that this state should last, but of course it doesn’t. ‘Why is my happy, blissful moment of meditation turning into an awful memory of my last relationship (or job, or whatever)? I was blissed out of my mind, and suddenly up came an awful memory of when I was a child and my mother screamed at me.’ These memories leave traces, marks in our hearts and minds. Sometimes when a memory is extreme it constitutes a trauma. Sometimes it is just called ‘painful memory.’

Sukha  and dukkha  work together. The more we run away from dukkha , the more we want sukha ; the more we want sukha , the more dukkha  pops its head up. It is like a pendulum. The mind is like a pendulum.

The Buddha did not speak much about what happens once we get to the absence of greed, hatred and delusion, though in the Udana  he describes it in this way:

There is the unborn, uncreated, unformed, unoriginated, and therefore there is an escape from the born, created, formed, originated. If it were not for the unborn, uncreated, unformed, unoriginated, there would be no escape from the born, created, formed, originated, but because there is the unborn, uncreated, unformed, unoriginated, there is an escape, there is liberation from the born, created, formed, originated.

Udana  8.3

The Buddha taught profoundly and very broadly on the dukkha of human existence and, fortunately, he also expounded on the way out of dukkha. He offered us his unrivalled knowledge of the mind, not in the way science examines the human brain as an apparatus that puts us in touch with the world outside, but from the perspective of how to end dukkha. As one teacher said, ‘The whole path of Buddhism is to decrease suffering.’ So if you have suffering in your life, double-check: this is a symptom of something. It is not that you are ‘bad’. It is not something to be taken personally. None of us would have taken an interest in the Buddha’s teaching if we hadn’t at some point experienced a sense of being fed up with living blindly. Most of us have experienced regret and misery. We have felt unable to deal with suffering, stuck and incapable of liberating our heart.

The Buddhist path touches on every aspect of ourselves and every aspect of life. It is not just a set of methods to calm the mind down. It shows us that everything we do, say and think is interconnected. Everything we do has a result, bears a fruit. In our practice of meditation we learn to notice, to look, to see. This requires complete willingness to participate actively in the research. That is why we need to be awake. The word ‘Buddha’ means ‘awake’. If you are not awake you don’t have the energy that is necessary to penetrate this knowledge of the mind. The mind is very tricky. It is a very difficult thing to hold for even a second. Everything moves and changes very quickly. Ajahn Chah used the simile of catching a fish with your hands. I’ve never caught a fish, but I imagine it is very slippery. You can’t hold it for very long. Ajahn Chah compared the mind to a slippery fish.

But the mind doesn’t feel like a slippery fish. It can feel more as if we are being crushed underneath heaps of dukkha . So when we practise meditation we are affecting our lives in a deeper way than we imagine. We are having a taste of the absence of greed, hatred and delusion in a very small dose. For just a few minutes we see the mind when it is not attached. We begin to notice what that feels like. We begin to see, for example, that greed has a cause. Then we see it disappearing. What has happened? We have noticed the end of a moment of greed. The same can happen with anger. We become really upset because we don’t get something we want. Then we suddenly observe what is happening; we begin to see, we can listen to it, feel it and notice when it has ended.

This requires a certain amount of attentiveness, because sometimes it is subtle. Before we began practising, we rarely paid attention to the moments when something ended – the ending of a state of greed or anger, the ending of anything; as soon as we felt okay we would move on to the birth of the next state: ‘I’m all right now. Let me find somebody else I can be with (or another piece of cake, etc.).’ We forget. But mindfulness is remembering: remembering to look, to see, to be interested in this life which is creating our world moment by moment. What is our world right now? Are we happy? Are we peaceful? Are we a mixed bag of both or neither peace nor happiness, or this or that? Grey? Unformed? That is called confusion.

Are we confused?

Basically, unless we are developing the skill of seeing, we can’t know; we can’t know something unless we see it. When we practise meditation, we calm the mind artificially by making use of a word, a mantra or the breath. Such a technique can help the mind to calm down so that you can see and hear inwardly more clearly.

When the mind is not in a good place, I’ve noticed that it doesn’t function very well. The mind needs care. For instance, if your mind feels miserable, sometimes just noticing what is happening can bring a balance to the mind. The mind is comforted and then ready to continue working better. When we listen to our mind, it brings peace, and peace can bring energy into our mind.

The practice is an invitation to thoroughly explore the manifestation and structure of thoughts, feelings and moods. We begin to notice details, causes and results. This requires stillness, attention and motivation. Interest is one of the primary conditions. It is called ‘chanda ’ in Pali and it is a wholesome form of desire. Sometimes people find Buddhism depressing because they assume it means they can’t want anything, and as soon as they want something they feel they have failed. But the Buddha’s path is not about ‘not wanting’, it is about noticing, studying the experience of desire, and letting go. There is a difference between a healthy desire and an unhealthy one. We may notice that a desire to be happy has made us unhappy because we have become hooked on the experience of happiness. But we can live without depending on a feeling of happiness. Not only that, we can also find a different kind of happiness that is more subtle – the happiness of freedom, the happiness of a mind liberated from dependence on wanting to be happy.

The Precepts are the first basic directions; they give us a sound foundation. We want to be happy – but do we want to kill, steal, lie, be promiscuous? Do we want to speak in a way that destroys our happiness? Do we want to take intoxicating drinks and drugs? We go straight into renunciation with the Five Precepts. We renounce anger and destructive emotions, stealing and lying, using our sexual energy for selfish ends. We renounce using our ability to communicate and speak in a way that perpetuates a miserable world, and weakening control of our mind through intoxicating drink and drugs.

It is important to know that the first step on the path is to be human, not to be a Buddha. There is a tendency to be very ambitious, but great ambition can result in disappointment. Vipassana practice is simply the study of mind and body, and seeing the three characteristics to which the Buddha pointed – everything is impermanent, everything is unsatisfactory, and everything is not a ‘self’, there is no permanent ‘me’.

At first the idea of not having a ‘me’ in charge of everything may be devastating: ‘How can I live without my commander-in-chief?’ But when we see that the self is truly an illusion, we discover lots of blessings along the way. We are not left abandoned, flattened by the lack of aspiration and motivation. It is not like that at all. What takes us to realization of no-self is wisdom. And wisdom is not a small thing; it is really worth exchanging delusion for wisdom. Wisdom is much more powerful, much more capable than delusion. It is able to respond to life with delight, so we can delight in the responses we see coming from a mind that is not caught up in delusion, a mind that knows.