## Patience, Energy, Interest

Practice takes patience, energy, and a very deep interest in discovering what the Buddha means by greed, hatred and delusion. Very often the interest comes when we are at the end of our rope. It is not necessarily something that comes naturally. Many people come to practise because they have seen that suffering, limitation and confusion are not the way forward. They have realized that they are living in a subjective reality and they don’t want to carry on living in that kind of world. So the practice often starts with, ‘I’m fed up with this. I don’t want it anymore. I’ve had enough of suffering, of being confused, deluded and angry.’ Sometimes we don’t actually move in the right direction until we have been pushed by the sense of ‘enough is enough.’ It doesn’t have to be dramatic; it can be very subtle. Little by little we accumulate an understanding about anger, for example, and we realize that the state of anger is not something we want to live in all the time or part of the time or even any time at all. Perhaps we come to know that the mind can be quiet and peaceful and we naturally feel the quiet loveliness of the peaceful mind.

This can come about through silence. Silence has a way of making us feel connected. We notice our mind is silent and suddenly we are back at home. Much of the time, our senses are taking us ‘out there’. We don’t realize that the world begins in the citta, in our heart/mind. The senses and their objects are constantly triggering our citta, so when we are in turmoil we tend to blame outside factors: people, situations, the world in general. When we bring the citta to a place of coolness and calm we have a chance to look at our responses. We can begin to clearly see that what manifests outside is very much a reflection of our mind itself. It may take a while to see this clearly because human beings have so many things going on in their minds. It’s a very complex inner world. We react to things twice over; we react once and then we react again. We find ourselves trapped in reactions, but that’s not our fault, as in fact there is nobody to blame. If we want to blame anything, we should blame avijjā (ignorance). We can’t blame ourselves for being blind. We didn’t ask to be blind. We haven’t invited blindness into our lives. The blindness just came along with us and our bodies and minds, so we can’t really feel bad about it. That’s why the Buddha doesn’t make a big issue out of guilt. Instead, he draws our attention to understanding ways of reacting.