## The Path of Liberation

When we attempt to follow a religious path, we sometimes approach the teachings and practices at a superficial level which has little to do with liberation. We may start feeling that we have to become something or somebody, to create ourselves and behave in accordance with a mistaken understanding of that particular teaching. When we start following the Buddha’s path we may fear that we have to be a certain way and that doing something wrong would be terrible and jeopardize our freedom. We begin to see ourselves in a certain way and feel we have to constantly prop up this ‘Buddhist self’ who has to be good and kind – has to play a part, in other words.

But that’s not freedom. The Buddhist teaching of liberation is a free vehicle. It doesn’t have a specific name. The Buddha never called his teaching ‘Buddhism’. Liberation is an aspiration that arises naturally when the mind realizes that it is in bondage, caught up in the pain of delusion, anger and greed. The danger with ‘religion’ is that, grasped wrongly, it can take you back to those same things – greed, hatred and delusion. You can see that everywhere in the world.

Liberation is letting go of images about ourselves. It is difficult because what we call the ‘ego’ is made up of images, many of which are built up by fear and don’t disappear easily. We don’t become ‘somebody’ in our minds because ‘we’ have created that somebody, but just because it is created and manifests through greed, hatred, fear, delusion, envy, jealousy and many other unhealthy, unskilful mental states and intentions. To overcome this the Buddha offers a lot of very good, clear guidelines for integrating the path in our daily lives and helping the mind to cultivate qualities that are rooted in kindness and goodness. These guidelines come from his own experience. If we trust the Buddha’s experience, we have confidence in what he teaches. Indeed, we can see this for ourselves. When we do, say or think something good, when we manifest qualities that are skilful, healthy and sound, the result will always be a happier mind. We don’t need to believe the Buddha to see that. We experience it for ourselves as we apply close attention.

When we see this, we find it fascinating that we did not see it before. That was because of ignorance, avijja. Sometimes these qualities manifest in what we call the unconscious or the subconscious. There are layers upon layers of mental activities of which we are unaware. That is why it is really worthwhile to pursue this path. If we truly want to discover what it is to free the mind, we can do this by paying deep attention to the mind itself, clearly seeing cause and result. We don’t have to be perfect to do this; if we had to wait until we were perfect, we would wait for a long time.

Many of us have been discouraged by seeing our delusion and have almost abandoned any interest in the path because we feel, ‘I’m so greedy (or impatient, angry, etc.), I can’t do it. I can’t follow this path. I can’t be a Buddhist because I am so deluded.’ But in fact, it is because we are deluded that we need to walk the Path. And we need to make peace with our delusion. What else is there to work with? Buddhism wouldn’t need to exist if we didn’t have anger, greed and ignorance. The Buddha brought this path into the world of humans to illuminate those mind-states, not to make us believe that by just reading or listening to his teachings, or meditating, we are instantly going to turn into a holy being.

If our minds are miserable, we can look at our belief systems. We may have very strong beliefs that are not conducive to happiness, such as, ‘Nobody likes me’, ‘I can’t stand that person’ or ‘I’m no good.’ We may find we are attached to rites and rituals, doubt, or many other things. We see those things and we acknowledge them in a way that is liberating. We don’t have to eradicate our mind, kill it, trample on it, squeeze it, squash it, or turn it into something completely dead and miserable. We start by using the instrument we have at our disposal, and this instrument is called ‘mind and body.’ We use this instrument to face life and our ‘self’ as they are. That takes strength. It takes energy. It takes interest, fearlessness, compassion and patience. It takes many things to be able to look at reality as it is.

Once we become more mindful, we start noticing small things that we would have missed before: little details of the kindness of others, small things they do or say, small things they manifest in thought and words. We begin to notice these manifestations of kindness and our world becomes much happier. We can easily create a world of anger, a negative, critical and undermining world, simply because we don’t notice the noble qualities in people. Through mindfulness we break our habit of creating negativity, of undermining others and ourselves. Through mindfulness we notice when people are kind, or generous, the small things that make us see the world in a happier way.