## Meeting Reality

A teacher in the Thai Forest tradition once told some of his disciples that when we meet someone, we needn’t be overly romantic. To put it bluntly, we are just meeting a big bag of kilesas. Once we see this reality as it is, we don’t have unrealistic expectations. Often we suffer when we find people’s minds are not the way we perhaps thought they were. We thought they were in charge. We thought they ought to be loving and caring. But it is good to remember that what we actually encounter is mostly a bunch of kilesas. This helps because attachment is a kilesa, even attachment to goodness and kindness. Attachment skews your perception. If you attach to goodness and kindness, or to being a Buddhist, somebody who doesn’t fit your view is suddenly ‘not right’. Often people say (or think), ‘How can you be angry and be a Buddhist? If you were a true Buddhist, you would be really patient with me. If you were a true Buddhist you would be able to control your mind.’

No. ‘True Buddhists’ are people who can see when they don’t control their minds. They see their mind as they are. They aren’t caught up in an idea of how the mind should be. As true Buddhists we have the wisdom to know what makes us turn into hellish beings with hellish lives, and the wisdom to know how to bring those lives into a place of goodness, kindness, love and peace, the qualities that make a liveable world. Then the practice and life become a single unit. We may be practising sitting in full lotus or on a chair, or lying down, walking or running, but the mind (citta) is with us all the time. And the mind is not just the brain or the intellect. It is the reality that we experience in each moment. This experience includes feelings, mental constructs, memories, desires, sensations – whatever experience is present here and now, this is the mind.

The practice is so beautifully simple. All the techniques, methods and teachings are designed simply to bring us back to the present moment, here and now, to bring us back to seeing clearly. All the techniques and methods help to give us a good pair of spectacles. We wear them so we don’t have blurry eyesight. When we look at the world through lenses of greed, hatred or delusion, we look at a very blurry world. And yet as meditators, we can become attached to clarity, to purity, to wanting a perfect view. But it may be a long time before we achieve that perfect view. Meanwhile our vision is not clear yet and that’s just the way it is.

The Buddha encourages us to develop Right Effort, Right Concentration and Right Mindfulness as balancing factors helping us bit by bit to achieve clear vision. Balance is a skill we develop, we don’t achieve it straightaway. We’re not working with an inanimate object. We are working with energy, our big energy body that doesn’t always tell us in advance how it is going to respond to the practice. So we have to become skilled in receiving this energy without freaking out, without misinterpreting it or being confused by the energetic movement of the mind and body. According to the Buddha’s teaching, integration of the world begins with sila (ethics); that is the foundation. Ethics requires effort, it calls for energy. It can be more difficult than meditation and attaining Samadhi. Ethics is the first step, and the hardest one for most people.