## Keeping On

Even when the practice becomes boring or uninteresting, we still stay with it. The state of boredom may be a crucial moment, as it could mean we are on the edge of letting go. Mara will do anything to make us give up. When you’re just about to give up, stay with the practice mindfully; persevere and read the mind correctly. ‘Reading the mind correctly’ is an expression used often in the Forest Tradition. It sounds simple, but we mostly read our minds incorrectly. We see permanence when there is impermanence. We see happiness when there is misery. We see things as belonging to us when they do not – ‘my’ property, ‘my’ body, ‘my’ mind. We often read the mind incorrectly and so think we are incapable of achievement, but if we really look into the mind we will discover its great abilities.

One way of reading the mind incorrectly is by being caught up in thinking, in that mass of agitating mental activity. Agitation is one of the Five Hindrances. It makes us worried and restless, it generates more and more mental proliferation. But we can say, ‘Stop. I am just going to be with my breath for five minutes.’ That’s all. Of course, the little child inside may say, ‘No! I’m not going to do that! I’m only going to do what I want! I won’t do stupid things like paying attention to the breath!’ Listen to that childish voice and then gently bring your attention back to the breath. The mind is very trainable. It is not too difficult to train, it just needs correct reading and learning the skill of calming the mind and letting go.

When you are confused, upset or agitated, this is just thought. Every thought agitates the nervous system and has an immediate effect on the body. When we don’t know our mind, our thoughts, we don’t have the space to see what is happening. We suddenly find ourselves in a mess and think, ‘What happened?!’ We don’t realize that we’ve been thinking in a particular way for a long time. Instead of looking at what has been going on in our minds, perhaps we have been blaming somebody else for our problems, and we’ve been so busy finding somebody to blame that we’ve forgotten our Buddhist practice of conscientiously looking at our mind, at our way of thinking. We can think negatively about someone: ‘She is so stupid. She is irritating and horrible. She’s hopeless. She hates me and I hate her.’ We can think like that for years without ever questioning the effect those thoughts have on our life.

The mind is powerful. We have to be very careful about what we think. We manifest the world with our thoughts. If that’s not a motivation to be free of defilements, I don’t know what is! If the suffering in our lives is increasing, we should double-check what is happening. Maybe we are not doing something right. We don’t have to accuse or blame ourselves. The teaching just asks us to be intelligent and take responsibility for ourselves so that we can grow and mature. Then we can deal more confidently with our diseases and we won’t need a doctor; we can actually be our own physician. We can be with our inner Buddha, and that is so empowering and joyful. And then, when we see the misery that we are unknowingly causing ourselves, we learn how to become humble, bow down and say, ‘Yes. Okay. I’ll start again.’