# What Accords With Dhamma

How are we holding the practice? The Buddha taught many different aspects of technique and method, often from an organic, big picture, complete view. How do we encompass that for ourselves? How do we develop a context for using different methods, techniques and particulars of practice?

One of the most clear and tangible examples showing the Buddha’s approach is the discourse in the Anguttara Nikaya entitled Volition (AN 10.2). The Buddha explains that, beginning with virtue, causes and conditions are put into place and one reaps the fruits of that. The Buddha says that there is no real need for a virtuous person to set the intention, “May I experience non-regret, non-remorse.” It is natural that that person would experience non-regret, non-remorse, and a sense of clarity and well-being with one’s conduct. There’s no need to set the intention or put forth the will, “May I experience gladness.” The Buddha explains that it’s natural.

He repeats this for gladness, joy, tranquility, happiness, and concentration. The Buddha then takes it from concentration on to seeing things clearly, experiencing dispassion, disenchantment, liberation, and knowledge and vision of liberation. It is important to note that it’s not as if you are trying to squeeze gladness or joy out of your meager being. When we fill the heart with a sense of virtue, gladness is quite natural. The word the Buddha uses for that is dhammatā. It has a deep meaning: according to Dhamma, according to fundamental realities of truth. This is the way the universe works. It involves paying attention to the qualities that support a sense of well-being. It all ties in.

It is the effort of observing what increases wholesome dhammas and what decreases unwholesome dhammas. Virtue is for the increase of wholesome qualities, wholesome dhammas. Happiness, joy, appreciation, loving-kindness: these are all qualities that we can be attending to and cultivating. They lay the foundation for well-being within the citta, within the mind, the heart: wholesome dhammas increase, unwholesome dhammas decrease. It is a natural progression.

This is the way the Buddha describes the cultivation of our meditation—secluded from sensuality, secluded from unwholesome dhammas, unwholesome qualities. It’s whatever we can do to facilitate the increase of wholesome qualities, wholesome dhammas, wholesome states of mind, and facilitate the decrease in the unwholesome. This is right effort, but the emphasis is on a natural cause-and-effect relationship. This leads to a refining of the citta, a sensitivity of the citta. That opens it to settling, to stillness, to clarity, to relinquishment, to release. That is dhammatā, according to Dhamma. This is the natural way of things. We want to be attending to ways that facilitate that. We have our precepts and our etiquette, so we can tune in to the appropriateness of our actions of body and speech. It beautifies the heart. We don’t need to be keeping precepts out of fear of divine retribution; it is an opportunity to beautify the heart and to create the conditions for increased refinement and clarity. It’s a natural process—we don’t need to be trying to squeeze it out of ourselves.

Some of it is our own efforts, but it also involves paying attention to the conduct of others. The reality is that we are incredibly blessed to live with people who value virtue and sensitivity, honesty and integrity. That’s incredibly rare in the world. Really make that conscious and delight in it. Living in that way, it’s quite natural that there would be delight, pāmojja, gladdening. Given the habitual mind, we can easily home in on our flaws and faults, and the flaws and faults of others, and obsess over them. This creates pain for ourselves and others. That’s why it’s so important to have that bigger picture. It’s a very wholesome quality to have the sense of conscience and a wish to dwell in integrity. But balance is essential, so that one is not forgetting the bigger picture.

When we sit down to meditate, we are paying attention to whatever meditation object we use. When using the breath, we are paying attention to the in-breath, the out-breath, paying attention to the body, soothing the body with the breath, settling the mind with the breath-filled body. There’s an ease that comes from that awareness and mindfulness. There’s the appreciation of stillness, tranquility, and calm. We don’t have to get all tied up in knots trying to hang on to it, or trying to force it to be there. When we are able to step back, attend to the breath, attend to the posture, attend to mindfulness and clear comprehension, there is an ease and a settling that quite naturally takes place. We want to direct our attention in that way, to be able to foster that, to abide and dwell in that.

It’s not about developing our personality or trying to become the perfect person. Rather, it is learning how to be mindful and appreciating the things that we do have or what we do experience. I remember Luang Por Sumedho one time saying, “I am absolutely certain that my personality is never going to become enlightened.” It’s quite true. The nature of personality, personhood, the me-and-mine stance, is always going to be fraught with praise and blame, gain and loss, happiness and suffering. That is its very nature. How do we step back into the process of what is in accordance with Dhamma, dhammatā? What is actually natural? What is according to nature? When we are willing to drop all the other fears, concerns, obsessions, and desires, what is left? There is this tremendous opportunity for stillness and clarity, for well-being.

It’s a natural process that relies on the wholesome. It relies on the skillful. We use mettā, loving-kindness. That sense of mettā is a field of well-being. We do the chant, “May I abide in well-being, may everyone abide in well-being.” That kind of wish is a very beautiful state of mind; there’s an uplift to it. It is so overwhelmingly wholesome that it’s a powerful doorway into samādhi, the settling of the mind. It’s extremely difficult—if not impossible—for the mind to settle into stillness through analysis, comparing, and judging. That quality of loving-kindness becomes a foundation, a field that can be used in conjunction with the breath. It’s like riding the breath with loving-kindness. There’s a moving into stillness. It’s a natural process, dhammatā. This is according to Dhamma. Secluded from sensuality, secluded from unwholesome dhammas. That’s your basic foundation for sammā-samādhi, right concentration.

We use loving-kindness. Turn to it. Make it conscious. Again, it’s not that we don’t have it, but when it’s not made conscious and appreciated, then one misses that opportunity. It’s using yoniso manasikāra, wise attention, considered reflection, so that one is attending to the wholesome, attending to loving-kindness, to compassion, to gladness, to appreciation, to equanimity—the brahmavihāras. These are abidings that are truly divine. They are divine abidings not because they take you somewhere else, but because they place you front and center, right in the middle of what is completely wholesome, and the mind settles. It is the opportunity to be happy within and not be seeking for some kind of perfection or rightness of our personality that puts us in doubt and uncertainty. Rather, we fill the citta, the heart, with these wholesome qualities that the Buddha keeps pointing to over and over again.

One is looking at it from the place of a bigger picture rather than getting tied up in the nuts and bolts of which mental state comes first or how much of this is needed for that. There are many people who would be happy to explore that but, to me, it doesn’t seem that fruitful. The Buddha is giving us the tools, “I teach only suffering and the ending of suffering.”

We want to be able to recognize this feeling of limitation and lack, this feeling of somehow being at fault for something or other. We can analyze it, struggle with it, demonize it, or whatever. Or we can recognize it: “This is suffering.” Then we can ask, “What is the cessation of suffering? What is the ending of suffering? What is the non-arising of suffering, dukkha-nirodha?” All of the components of the process—virtue, gladness, joy, happiness, tranquility, samādhi, stillness, seeing things in their true nature, dispassion, and disenchantment—they all have that flavor of the non-arising of dukkha, the cessation of dukkha. This accords with Dhamma. This is natural. This is a natural process that we can be plugging into: dhammatā.

How do we approach practice? How do we see ourselves practicing? Is it me that is lacking in meditative skill and lacking in wisdom that has to get more stillness, more wisdom? Or is it that we have this life and this body, and this citta which can distinguish between happiness and suffering? Can I incline it toward that which is really uplifting and beneficial for myself and for others? Yes, of course. Not so much as a personal project to enhance my personality, but as the giving of oneself to the practice because it accords with Dhamma and it would be the wise way to accord with nature. That’s a very different approach and the result is very different.

We can dedicate our practice for the well-being of others, trying to bring more goodness and peace into the world. Again, it’s not personalized, but it is a recognition that people naturally appreciate something that is peaceful, clear, trustworthy, associated with happiness, not consumer-based. It’s not just gratification of the senses, but it is a happiness that is unalloyed. It stands on its own and is based on skillfulness, on goodness, and it doesn’t have any kind of problematic quality.

It’s like in the story of the Buddha. He was fully committed to following the path of liberation that was the accepted standard in his time, and even in modern times: the path of abnegation, renunciation, and extreme asceticism. The Buddha was incredibly gung-ho. I am reading a book on the history of Tibet that is based on a series of conversations between the author, a historian, and His Holiness the Dalai Lama. It’s not a scholastic history, but it relies on scholasticism. The author asks His Holiness what his favorite Buddha image is. His Holiness’ favorite is a Gandhāran image found in northern Pakistan that depicts the Buddha at the peak of his extreme asceticism. It’s very grim: eyes sunken and, as in the Buddha’s description, ribs are sticking out like jutting rafters of an old run-down barn. When he touched his belly he could feel his spinal column. Of course the author is surprised: “What? How can that be?” His Holiness explains that it reminds him of the dedication of the Buddha, the willingness of the Buddha to give everything for liberation. I thought that was very moving. The Buddha tried everything. He did realize, “This is fruitless.” In his first discourse he describes it as an extreme that is not to be taken because it’s painful and it doesn’t bear fruit.

In the Mahasaccaka Sutta (MN 36), the Buddha is talking about his own ascetic practices to another ascetic, Saccaka. He describes the recollection of a time when he was a young boy, sitting outside in the shade of a tree. His mind became very still and he experienced tremendous happiness. He questioned why he feared that happiness, the happiness that has nothing to do with sensuality, nothing to do with unwholesome things, secluded from sensuality, secluded from unwholesome dhammas. It is completely wholesome. Probably many of us have that sense of not wanting to feel too good, not wanting to indulge, thinking, “I am going to pay for this.” The Buddha was referring to nirāmisa sukha, a happiness that is not of the flesh, that is not bait. It’s the happiness that is not bait set in a trap. It’s not bait that you use to put on the end of a hook to catch something. It’s a happiness that is unalloyed.

So virtue, mindfulness, settling the heart. Reflecting and considering: What is natural? What accords with Dhamma? What is dhammatā? What are those processes of cause and condition that lead to release, to the non-arising of dukkha? It’s an exploration. It’s the big picture, recognizing that if we start with that perspective, it’s going to take us in that direction. If we start with “I’ve got to get this to gain that. I’ve got to achieve this, attain that in order to become something like a good practitioner,” we tend to tie ourselves up. Yes, that has a conventional basis, but the underlying assumptions lead us in ways that entangle us. That itself is a kind of baited hook. So we direct our attention to the bigger picture, this sense of what accords with Dhamma. We are feeding, nourishing, and nurturing our practice.

I’ll leave this for your reflection.