# Purifying the Foundation

Often, how we begin something tends to condition the direction it goes. Whenever there are various beginnings and endeavors that we embark on, starting in a clear and skillful way is really helpful.

When we think about practicing meditation in our lives or developing our Buddhist practice, we tend to think of the different meditation techniques and our successes and failures in our meditation. Ajahn Chah was a great meditation master. He was somebody who taught meditation to the monastic and lay communities. He himself was very adept. But if you look at the bulk of his teachings, there’s much more of an importance placed on two themes: sīla and sammādiṭṭhi, virtue and right view. It’s very important to take note of this because so often we think, “What’s wrong with my meditation technique? What’s wrong with my mind? My mind is all over the place.” We forget that there are roots that need to be nurtured.

Sometimes it’s much more useful to backtrack and see what we can do to reestablish our connection with our sīla, our virtue, and examine what kind of view we are holding. In what ways can I adjust my view to be supportive of my practice? Often the meditation flows out of that. Everything has a root, and we are able to nourish the roots skillfully.

There’s a discourse in the Saṃyutta Nikāya that has the same theme. A monk comes to the Buddha and asks him for instructions so that he can go off and practice diligently. Curiously enough, the Buddha actually admonishes him, speaks to him pretty sharply, saying, “What is this, people coming and asking questions and not bothering to follow up on the practice.” Then the monk reiterates, saying, “Please, may I have some instruction in brief so that I can go off and practice?”

Then the Buddha agrees to teach. He says to purify the very starting point of wholesome states. To purify the very starting point of wholesome states is to purify virtue and to make one’s views straight, aligning the views with sammādiṭṭhi, right view. He says that once one has purified sīla and made one’s views straight, with that foundation, then direct one’s attention to the four foundations of mindfulness. It’s a very interesting instruction. The Buddha is placing emphasis on coming back and purifying the very starting point of wholesome states.

When we direct our attention to mindfulness and to meditation, if that root of wholesome mental qualities is there, then the meditation is going to go a lot more smoothly; it’s going to be much more accessible to us. Purifying virtue is not so much about getting the legal description of the precepts and then seeing how much one has to do and how much one can get away with. It’s more about approaching the precepts from a place of hiri and ottappa. In Buddhist practice, these qualities are called the protectors of the world.

These protectors of the world are difficult to translate into English. A good translation for hiri is conscience, but it’s sometimes a sense of shame or shrinking back from the unwholesome. It’s important to recognize the difference because shame and guilt can make it very complicated. The root of conscience is a respect for oneself when one either is contemplating doing something or when one has done something that is unskillful, and it elicits a sense of “Gosh, I can do a lot better than that.” One wants to protect oneself from one’s own unskillfulness. There’s a sense of respect for oneself. There’s directing attention to a sense of protection, of looking after oneself so that one is able to nurture the qualities that uplift the mind and brighten the heart. That’s hiri.

Ottappa is often translated as a fear of wrongdoing. Again, it’s a sense of shame and fear, but it’s a fear of wrongdoing because of respect for others. So hiri and ottappa are rooted in respect: respect for oneself and respect for others. One holds oneself and others dear. Then one doesn’t want to harm or create suffering for others.

When our integrity, our sīla, has this wholesome root, it keeps bringing more and more wholesome mental states because it’s based on a wise understanding that our actions have results, both for ourselves and for others. Since our actions have results, we want to make sure those results are ones that we can delight in and that create a sense of well-being and harmony with those around us.

From a Buddhist perspective, our sīla, our precepts, are training rules. Training: we’re learning, educating ourselves. It’s not beating ourselves into submission; it’s a learning process. When we take the precepts, the Pali for the word precept is sikkhāpadaṃ. That word sikkhāpadaṃ is a mixture of two words, pada, which means foot or base, and sikkhā, which is to learn, to study, to train, to educate. Certainly in the Buddha’s time, education was an actual, hands-on engagement. It’s not sitting down with a book and memorizing something but learning through our conduct.

We train and learn through doing. It’s through our actions of body and speech that we’re training. We’re learning. We educate ourselves. What works? What doesn’t work? What’s beneficial? What’s not beneficial? What leads to well-being and happiness? What leads to complication and difficulty?

That’s what precepts are: they’re training rules that we gain skill in through living. Sometimes we get it right and sometimes we get it wrong, but we can learn from it. Purifying virtue is that willingness to learn from our engagement with our actions of body and speech, and then our mind is right there as well. It’s a learning process.

Virtue is something we’re cultivating and developing because it does have a result, and that is the foundation of right view, making our views straight, making our views align with sammādiṭṭhi. The foundation of right view is the sense of being the owner of our actions. When we do the chant on the Divine Abidings, for equanimity we chant, sabbe sattā kammassakā kammadāyādā kammayonī kammabandhū kammapaṭisaraṇā. “I am the owner of my action, heir to my action, born of my action, related to my action, abide supported by my action.” We tune into the sense that we do reap what we sow—what we do has results.

We’re hard-wired to prefer happiness and well-being to suffering, pain, and difficulty. It’s very much a part of our human nature. And we still do things that create suffering for ourselves. It’s one of the curious aspects of human existence. We know something, forget about it, and then go ahead and do things that are to our detriment. But that is also the cultivation of wisdom and discernment: being able to have clear knowledge and understanding, having that right view so that we follow through with our actions and speech. “If I’m the heir to my actions, owner of my actions, then I really want to do that which brings happiness and well-being to myself and to others.” Again, that’s the very starting point of wholesome states. This phrase I find very beautiful.

When we say we’re the owners of our actions, heirs to our actions, it’s also recognizing that we have a certain element of freedom to make choices and to make skillful choices. I’ve heard it expressed many times in Buddhist circles, “Everything is kamma. Everything you experience is a result of kamma. Whatever you experience, it’s because of something that you’ve done in your past.” That is an extreme view, which is not sammādiṭṭhi, not right view. It’s a view, but it’s not right view. The Buddha himself said that, in addition to kamma, there are just the aspects of nature. We inhabit a natural world and a human body, and we’re affected by all of it.

In the Buddha’s teachings there are different natural laws that affect us. There are inorganic laws of science, utu-niyama. I can remember years ago—it’s actually sixteen years ago around this time—this big tsunami that took place in Southeast Asia and affected South Asia. People said, “Well, it’s kamma.” Well, no! There are tectonic plates. It’s science. These are natural laws and that’s the way the natural world works. These are laws that govern us.

Bīja-niyama are organic natural laws. Bīja means seed and refers to aspects of the way plants and nature work. One can even say genetics can be a part of bīja-niyama. These are organic laws of nature and they affect us.

We’re conditioned in different ways, citta-niyama, the way the mind responds to circumstances. It can be in a beneficial way or it can be in a non-beneficial way. The mind has a role to play. Kamma-niyama is your force law. And the last one is dhamma-niyama, which is a catch-all. It ends up being more social: how things integrate and play together and create social dynamics.

All these different dynamics are affecting us. Kamma is one of them. But what we do definitely has a result. If you respond to somebody with anger and aversion, you’ll probably get a negative response back. If you respond with kindness and patience, you tend to get that same response back. That’s how we feel it as well: it resonates internally. At the very starting point of wholesome states we have a role to play.

The Buddha points to the root defilements: greed, hatred, delusion. These are going to create problems. When the Buddha points to the cause of suffering, he’s pointing to taṇhā: desire, thirst. But taṇhā is always desire that is tainted with greed, hatred, delusion. It always ends up in a place of suffering and complication. It always ends up unsatisfactory.

We translate taṇhā into English as desire, but it’s important to recognize that taṇhā as a cause of suffering is a technical term. It is desire that has greed, hatred, and delusion and is always going to end in suffering, whereas we have different kinds of desires in English. You have the desire to do good. You have the desire to meditate, to start the new year with practicing Dhamma. It’s incredibly wholesome. That’s a great desire. That’s a really wholesome desire. But that wouldn’t be called taṇhā in the scriptural language. That would be chanda. It’s desire or motivation that can be wholesome.

When we recognize that we have these different desires we can nurture something that is good. You can’t try to annihilate all forms of desire or all forms of action, like “I shouldn’t be doing anything.” What we do has results. It can be wholesome results; it can be unwholesome results. We need to do the work that allows us to establish clarity, wisdom, and discernment so that we can make the choices that nurture well-being, skillfulness, happiness, and peace. One of the words that the Buddha uses to describe the peaceful mind is kammaniya, ready for work. It’s ready to do what needs to be done, to do what is skillful. Being the owners of our actions means cultivating skill in developing our wisdom.

As we purify virtue and right view, the very starting point of wholesome states, we start directing attention to the four foundations of mindfulness. We bring attention to the body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind: basically, body and mind. This is the ground that we’re cultivating. Our development is just this body and mind. It’s not far away. It’s not some other realm, somewhere else. It’s just in this very body, this very mind, learning about it, studying it. Again, one of the bases of our Buddhist practice is sikkhā, training. In the same way that precepts are a form of training, the whole path of cultivation is a training, an education, a learning.

In a summary of the Noble Eightfold Path, the Buddha brings it down into what’s called tri-sikkhā, the three trainings in virtue, meditation, and wisdom. Those are things to train in. Those are things to cultivate. Those are things to develop. As we pay attention, we can train ourselves; we can learn. The great beauty of a human birth is that we can actually learn. One is not able to actually learn in the lower realms or even in some of the higher realms. We have this human birth, and we can learn from our experience of happiness and suffering. We can learn from the things we did right; we can learn from the things we did wrong. And we can learn how to be free, how to liberate the heart. That is an incredible blessing.

But that learning needs to be based on directing attention mindfully. In the description of establishing mindfulness, the Buddha says that having established those roots of wholesome states, one directs one’s attention to the four foundations of mindfulness in three ways: internally, externally, and both internally and externally. For each of those four foundations of mindfulness, how do we experience it internally? How do we pay attention to our own experience and learn from that? And then how do we pay attention to the world outside of us and see how things play themselves out externally?

We’re not isolated beings. We are inevitably connected to the world around us through our connections with our family, our friends, and our social situation. There are all these different layers of connection and we can learn from the external. Opanayiko in this sense means seeing something external and bringing it into the heart: learning from it, understanding it, cultivating discernment. How do we integrate the internal and external? How do we seek a balance so that there’s a recognition and an understanding of both our own internal processes and the world around us?

Of course, that’s a function of mindfulness. The foundation or the base is always in terms of coming back to the Four Noble Truths. The Buddha said it over and over again, “I teach only two things: dukkha and cessation of dukkha”: suffering and ending of suffering, dissatisfaction and the ending of dissatisfaction, stress and the ending of stress. We need to be paying attention to ourselves and to the world around us. Then we have to integrate those two so that there’s an evenness, a smoothness.

It’s not just about being mindful of oneself. “If I’m just mindful and I keep my head down being mindful, then it’s all going to work out.” No, you have to pay attention to the world around you. When we do the chanting and recollect the Buddha, one of the qualities of the Buddha is vijjā-carana-sampanno: perfect in knowledge and conduct. The two are working together: the internal knowledge, the external expression, and then the understanding of those two. It’s that sense of cultivating a clear understanding.

What are these four foundations of mindfulness for, and what is mindfulness anyway? Especially these days, there’s a lot of complications around the expression of mindfulness. Whenever the Buddha talks about mindfulness, he always talks about it with four particular qualities. In the Pali they are ātāpī, sampajāno, satimā, and vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ. Ātāpī is ardent. There’s an effort there, it’s not passive-just-vegging-out mindfulness; there’s some application. One needs to put forth a bit of effort. But again, even when we think of right effort in the Noble Eightfold Path, it’s always about wholesome and unwholesome mental states. It’s not necessarily about how spectacular it looks on the outside or how energetic it appears or how much flailing around one does. It’s about the quality of the heart: increasing wholesome qualities and decreasing the unwholesome qualities. That’s the purpose of right effort. Ātāpī is application, being ardent.

Sampajāno means clearly comprehending. A part of clear comprehension is that sense of how our actions of body, speech, and mind affect ourselves and affect others, clear comprehension of seeing how that plays itself out.

Satimā is possessed of mindfulness: being aware, being alert, being present.

The last quality, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ, means pulling back from the habit of liking and disliking, wanting and not wanting, approving and not approving. We bounce around with our likes and our dislikes, the sense of “should be” or “shouldn’t be” and keep spinning around. Mindfulness is the ability to have balance, to not be pulled in, the willingness to relinquish or let go of the positions we tend to take. We tend to invest in our positions: liking and disliking, right and wrong, good and bad. We take a stand on them, and we tend to suffer accordingly, usually sharing it out as well.

So, we seek a sense of balance in our practice, purifying the very starting point of wholesome states, then put our attention on these four foundations of mindfulness: the Buddha said that if we do that, we will reap only that which is wholesome and skillful. That is the fruit. That is the result.

In the discourse itself, as these discourses go, the monk took the teaching that he received, went off and practiced, and realized awakening. But it’s a teaching for all of us, recognizing that there are foundations that we need to build and practices that we need to be cultivating.