# Mindfulness of Breathing: Food for the Heart

Mindfulness of breathing is probably the most common meditation object in the Buddhist tradition. Certainly in the discourses it’s the most common meditation that the Buddha himself taught, and, one would assume, that he actually practiced himself.

There was an occasion when the Buddha went on an extended period of retreat in his dwelling place in Jeta’s Grove at Sāvatthī. Ananda, his attendant, would come to bring food and look after his needs. One day the Buddha asked Ananda, “What would you tell people if they asked you about what the Buddha is doing? What meditation is the Buddha dwelling in? How would you answer?” Ananda said, “Well, I’m not sure. How should I answer?” The Buddha said, “You can tell people that the Tathāgata dwells in mindfulness of breathing. He’s doing ānāpānasati.”

Ānāpānasati is a meditation that one can take wherever one goes. You have to breathe, so it’s always there for you, always present. It’s something that can always be tuned in to. I remember one time Ajahn Chah was asked by a lay person what to do because it seemed so difficult to practice in the world: looking after livelihood, family, and various social relationships. It just seemed that there wasn’t enough time to meditate. Ajahn Chah asked him, “Do you have enough time to breathe?” He said, “Well, yeah.” “Then, you have enough time to meditate.” Your meditation is your breath. The breath is always there, so you can direct attention to it. Also, when one sees that meditation, mental cultivation, and spiritual development are as important as breathing, then one makes the time. It’s really true. It’s so critical to our well-being and existence.

One of the idioms that Ajahn Chah often used was “food for the heart.” We provide sustenance and nourishment for our hearts with mindfulness of breathing. The classical sutta presentation of mindfulness of breathing is the sixteen steps of mindfulness of breathing. These are found in the teachings on mindfulness of breathing and there are several discourses where the Buddha talks about it. It’s something that Abhayagiri and many monasteries chant on a regular basis. It’s familiar to us. We chant it. We recollect it. It comes to mind consistently.

It’s a very straightforward discourse. It was given to monks, but it includes all practitioners. “When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit. When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it fulfills the four foundations of mindfulness.” The development of mindfulness of breathing follows the structure of the four foundations of mindfulness. The four foundations of mindfulness are central to the tools that the Buddha has given us. “When the four foundations of mindfulness are developed and cultivated, they fulfill the seven factors of awakening.” These seven aspects of training the mind lead us to awakening and enlightenment. When developed and cultivated, the seven factors fulfill true knowledge and deliverance. The Buddha puts a lot of weight behind this: it develops the tools and ripens the fruits of true knowledge and freedom.

“And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and great benefit? Here, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut sits down having crossed his legs and sets his body erect, having established mindfulness in front of him.” Just go to a quiet place. It can be anywhere: it can be in your home, in your apartment, at a park, or at a meditation center. Of course, it can be at your local monastery. Sit comfortably: it can be in a chair, sitting down and crossing one’s legs, or however one needs to sit so that it’s comfortable.

Set the body erect: don’t slump and collapse in on oneself. When the body is upright, the mind is more upright. Establish mindfulness wherever it feels comfortable: tip of the nose, around the area of the throat, the chest, or the abdomen; wherever it’s comfortable and recognizable. Ever mindful, breathe in. Mindful, breathe out. Then he goes into establishing mindfulness with the rhythm of the breath, however one is experiencing it.

This begins the actual sixteen steps. The sixteen steps are divided into sections according to the four foundations of mindfulness. Four steps in the section on the body, four in the section on feeling, four in the section on mind, four in the section of the mind objects or phenomena, the dhammas.

“Breathing in long, one knows, ‘I breathe in long.’ Breathing out long, one knows, ‘I breathe out long.’” That’s the first step: the long breath coming in, going out. The verb is pajānāti, clear knowing. In the noun form, the word is paññā, which means wisdom, discernment, or knowing clearly.

“Breathing in short, one knows, ‘I breathe in short.’ Breathing out short, one knows, ‘I breathe out short.’” These are the first two steps: long breath, short breath. There’s no need to control the breath. It’s just a matter of knowing what the breath is. There’s no right or wrong way to breathe. There’s no “Oh, you’ve got too many long breaths in there. You’re doing it all wrong! You should have a few short ones.” That isn’t the case at all; it’s whatever the body is comfortable with. Settle into the rhythm of the breath and know clearly when one is breathing in long and breathing in short, whatever and however it is. Sometimes you’ll take a long in-breath and have a short out-breath. It’s however the body responds. The most important thing is the knowing.

The next section is on the body. For the rest of the fourteen steps, the verb changes in terms of duty or approach. The first two steps were pajānāti, knowing. For the rest, the operative verb is sikkhati, which means training, learning, and educating oneself. The noun in Pali is sikkhā and in Sanskrit, śikṣā. Thais use that word for study, “to be a student.” That’s what you do as a student: śikṣā. We’re learning; we’re training. How we learn is through this training.

We study our experience as we breathe in and breathe out. “Training thus, I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body. Training thus, I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body.” Take the whole body as a foundation to learn from, for what we’re studying and for what we’re training: “How do I inhabit my body?”

There’s a short story in James Joyce’s Dubliners. “Mr. Duffy lived a short distance from his body.” Most of us are Mr. Duffys. We’re a bit distant and not tuned in, anchored, grounded, or embodied. That’s a very common experience for people who live in busy societies and who have gone through years if not decades of formal education and livelihood. There’s so much emphasis given to the head that the rest of the body is sometimes forgotten or missed out on.

I don’t know about Europe as I haven’t been there in a while, but in America the pedestrian crosswalks have a stick figure that turns green for go. The figure is bent over, the head is leaning out, and it’s going: that’s what it’s like for most people. I’ve heard that Europe is a little more upright and body-centered, but certainly in North America the head is really going out there and leading the way. How do we inhabit this whole body? How do we not get so caught up in our heads that we forget that there’s something below the neck? Forgetting is not an uncommon experience.

Learning how to be aware and experience are the instructions given by the Buddha. The verb that is used for that is paṭisaṃvedī. Ajahn Geoff translates this as “sensitive to,” a nice translation. “Experiencing” is also a good translation because the stem is vedī. Paṭi and saṃ are both amplifiers, and vedī has the same root as vedanā, feeling. Feeling the whole body fully: sensitive to, experiencing, present for the whole body.

Grounding the practice in the bodily experience is a helpful anchor for our practice. Our minds can be all over the place, but the body’s corporeal: it’s physical, it’s material, it has some gravity to it. Our minds can flit all over the place, but gravity helps to hold us here, and that’s helpful.

Sensitive to bringing our experience into the body as we breathe in, as we breathe out. The last step in the section on the body is, “Training thus, I shall breathe in tranquilizing the bodily formations. Training thus, I shall breathe out tranquilizing the bodily formations.” Ajahn Geoff translates it as calming, which I actually prefer, but I’m reading it from our chanting book. The word is passambhayaṃ, which has the same root as the enlightenment factor of passaddhi, tranquility. This calming has a mental and physical element.

The whole body (sabbakāya) is slightly different from the bodily formations (kāyasaṅkhārā). In the discourses, when the Buddha said the bodily formations or conditioners, he meant the in-and-out breathing. One uses the breath as a way to calm the body so that one settles, makes tranquil, the bodily processes. Of course, that’s the whole body itself.

One uses the body as a vehicle for settling, calming, and making tranquil. It’s an exercise and a training. When we train and we learn, it’s the same as any other kind of training or learning. Sometimes we’re successful and sometimes we’re not. It’s in the doing that we learn. When we train, sometimes it’s easy and sometimes it’s difficult, but we keep coming back to the training. Work with the breath, work with the body, and work with ānāpānasati, mindfulness of breathing. As we practice, we keep learning about what works and what doesn’t work; what’s helpful and what’s not helpful. We learn what feels supportive and what seems like a dead end.

Sometimes when we’re learning or training in something, after a while things that used to feel completely hopeless and difficult start to become easy. It’s just the nature of training and learning. With mindfulness of breathing, it is not that one sits down and pays attention to the breath and everything becomes completely clear. This is an ongoing learning, an ongoing training.

The next section is on feeling, vedanā, if one lines it up with the four foundations of mindfulness. Pīti paṭisaṁvedī: “Training thus, I shall breathe in experiencing rapture. Training thus, I shall breathe out experiencing rapture.” Once the body is more relaxed, there’s a settling, and one can start tuning into the pleasant feelings that arise. For pīti, “rapture” might be a bit strong; other words are joy or exhilaration. As the mind settles on the breath and becomes more steady, the body relaxes and becomes more easeful. Internally, the feeling that arises within the mind is one of exhilaration and light; it’s joyful. That should be attended to and encouraged.

“Training thus, I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure. Training thus, I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure.” The Pali word here is sukha. Pīti, joy, tends to be a bit more mind-oriented, more of a mental event. Sukha, happiness or pleasure, is a bit more of a bodily experience. It’s satisfying to feel pleasure. For some people, meditation doesn’t seem very pleasurable. Why would you make yourself sit there and just do nothing? Good grief! The opportunity to settle, to deeply relax, is very conducive to joy, to pleasure, and to happy states of mind.

The next step in the section on feeling is, “Training thus, I shall breathe in, experiencing the mental formations. Training thus, I shall breathe out, experiencing the mental formations.” This is citta-saṅkhāra: citta being mind and saṅkhāra is formation and also that which forms. These are what condition the mind. This is why it’s in the section on feeling, because it’s what forms the mind, constructs the mind.

What forms the mind? What constructs it? What conditions it? The Buddha points to feeling and perception. Every mental state has a feeling tone: pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. And each has saññā: perception, memory, association, a pre-thought process. It’s not thinking; it’s perceiving, recognizing, and associating. This is what starts the ball rolling in the mind. In order to understand the mind, we have to understand its fundamental or root processes. We have to experience, be sensitive to, and be able to fully feel the mental formations, feeling and perception. They’re at a deep level of the mind, and the mind starts to move out from that point. Once it starts moving, then it’s like the train has left the station, and we’re left behind. That’s a problem.

The last step in the section on feeling is, “Training thus, I shall breathe in tranquilizing the mental formations. Training thus, I shall breathe out tranquilizing the mental formations.” These point to the sense of calming, settling, and making the mind tranquil. This has to be done with full awareness, full recognition. The more clearly one sees, recognizes, and experiences, the more one is inclined to settle and calm rather than getting on the proliferation train. That is deeply settling, and it’s a very fundamental process.

The first section of mindfulness of breathing was on paying attention to the body, next is paying attention to feeling. How do we feel? What is the tone? Not on the emotional level, but just the basic feeling tone. Is it pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral?

Next is the section on the mind, citta: “Training thus, I shall breathe in, experiencing the mind. Training thus, I shall breathe out, experiencing the mind.” Looking at the Buddha’s teachings on the four foundations of mindfulness, he talks about mindfulness of the mind as knowing the mood, the content of the mind. It’s knowing the mind with greed as the mind with greed and the mind without greed as the mind without greed; the mind with anger as the mind with anger. It’s not getting a commentary going, “Oh, my mind has anger.” Rather, it’s “This is what a mind with anger is like. This is the experience without anger.” With delusion, without delusion. The contracted mind as a contracted mind, the expanded mind as an expanded mind. The settled mind as a settled mind, the entangled mind as an entangled mind. The mind that’s released as a mind that’s released. It’s knowing the fundamental mood of the mind, knowing the state of the mind and its basic content.

All through this cultivation, one relies on the breath. This is the thread that comes through all of this training, through all of this teaching. It’s mindfulness of the in-breath, mindfulness of the out-breath. This has a very settling, integrating quality that supports our exploration, development, learning, and training.

The next one is “Training thus, I shall breathe in, gladdening the mind. Training thus, I shall breathe out, gladdening the mind.” Gladdening is abhipamodayaṃ. It’s sometimes understood as “delight.” Ajahn Geoff translates it as “satisfying.” Satisfying the mind with gladness, delight, and well-being. It’s helpful to see that the cultivation of mindfulness of breathing is integral to our whole practice, as is incorporating joy, pleasure, and gladness. It’s not illegal to meditate and feel good. It’s an integral part of the whole unfolding process of Dhamma to let go and relinquish. We release much more readily from a place of well-being than if we’re feeling put upon, oppressed, or closed in. Those feelings are not conducive to this path of practice.

The next one is samādahaṃ: “Training thus, I shall breathe in, concentrating the mind. Training thus, I shall breathe out, concentrating the mind.” I’m not so keen on the word “concentrating.” People tend to get really tense. Settle the mind, make the mind stable and firm. “Firming up the mind, I breathe in. Firming up the mind, I breathe out.” Settling, calming, and firmly establishing are for our growth and well-being.

The next one is “Training thus, I shall breathe in, liberating the mind. Training thus, I shall breathe out, liberating the mind.” Vimocayaṃ means liberating or releasing. This doesn’t necessarily mean complete and final liberation, release. It’s being willing to release just a little bit. The willingness to release our habits, our attachments, identity, and identification with things offers another avenue that’s pleasurable. It’s very satisfying. This wraps up the section on the mind.

It’s important to note that this is not a one-to-sixteen program. You can pick up the sixteen steps at any point you want or need, or however many you find useful. It’s a mix and match. It’s all there for us to develop as completely as we want, in whatever way. But, we don’t want to overwhelm ourselves. The Buddha has given us an incredible smorgasbord of tools—a great array of tools to choose and work with.

The aspect of letting go or release is an integral part of the whole training and cultivation of practice. It’s like Ajahn Chah’s well-known saying “If you let go a little, you’ll get a little peace. If you let go a lot, you’ll get a lot of peace. If you let go completely, you’ll get complete peace.” Letting go is an ongoing unfolding. The sense of gladdening the mind is important. We can direct attention to themes, thoughts, and perceptions that facilitate the gladdening and satisfying of the mind. It’s part of the practice or training.

The last part of this section is on dhammas: mental objects, phenomena, or themes of Dhamma. The first part is, “Training thus, I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence (aniccānupassī). Training thus, I shall breathe out, contemplating impermanence.” Ajahn Geoff translates it is “inconstancy.” Ajahn Chah expressed it often as uncertainty. “Training thus, I shall breathe in and out contemplating uncertainty, on change, on impermanence.” The manifestation of anicca is a universal characteristic. The contemplation of change is a doorway to insight. The lack of permanence in everything, internal, external, coarse or refined, far or near: everything. Body, mind, personal, world: it’s all anicca. It’s all impermanent, uncertain, inconstant.

The next is “Training thus, I shall breathe in, contemplating the fading away of passions (virāga). Training thus, I shall breathe out, contemplating the fading away of passions.” This is dispassion, directing attention to the cooling and releasing of the desire mode, the grasping mode. Releasing the passion for getting fired up to get this, be that, or want that. Reflect on it: has it ever really been satisfying? Has it ever fulfilled everything? This is where dispassion arises. It’s not aversion or rejection. It’s just fading. The passions fade because they’re actually not satisfying.

Bringing the mind or the heart to a place of joy, tranquility, and delight—that’s satisfying. Following desire, going out into the world, following the desire of self, propping up self in various ways—these are worth letting fade, allowing the mind to return to cooling and dispassion.

“Training thus, I shall breathe in, contemplating cessation (nirodha.) Training thus, I shall breathe out, contemplating cessation.” This is contemplating the ending of things. The mind is attracted to beginnings. We can get really excited about new things. Even on a microcosmic level with mindfulness of breathing, why is the in-breath more interesting than the out-breath? Why does attention tend to fade or get distracted on the out-breath? It’s because we tend to turn away from cessation or ending.

As a word, “cessation” has a nihilistic feeling to it, but dukkha-nirodha, the ending of suffering, can be a synonym for nibbāna. This is to bring about the end of defilements; the end of greed, hatred, and delusion. Another valid translation is “non-arising.” In dependent origination, there’s the arising of contact, feeling, and desire. There’s also the cessation of contact, feeling, and desire. With the non-arising of ignorance, there is the non-arising of mental formations. With the non-arising of desire, there’s the non-arising of clinging. That’s an important distinction because we get obsessed with stamping out our greed, hatred, and delusion, stamping out our ignorance and lack of knowledge. Attuning to non-arising is very settling. There’s a sense of peace in the non-arising of dukkha. We don’t have to be stamping out dukkha; it’s more like paying attention to the non-arising of dukkha, the non-arising of complication.

The last step in the whole Ānāpānasati Sutta (MN 118) is “Training thus, I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment. Training thus, I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment.” Relinquishment in this sense is paṭinissagga. There’s another word that’s quite similar, vosagga. It’s relinquishment of self-identity, the I-me-and-mine program that takes over. It’s the relinquishment of a misapprehension, misperception, or misunderstanding as opposed to the relinquishment of some kind of solid self. This is the whole point of the non-self teaching of the Buddha.

In the different formulations of clinging, upādāna, the Buddha described attavādupādāna, the attachment to self. But it is attachment to attavāda, the belief in self, the assumption of self. We assume it into existence; there’s no solid self there. We’re seeing that all the things that we assume as self are actually not. The anattā teaching is a middle-way teaching that gives us an opportunity to not get caught in the extremes of either negation or affirmation. In the Pali, you’ve got attā, which is an affirmation or propping up of self. But niratta is a negation, pushing away, rejection of self. Anattā is recognizing that whatever it is, it’s not self. Whatever we assume in terms of body, mind, form, feeling, perceptions, mental formations, or consciousness is not self. All the things that we take to be self are not. That’s the not-self teaching of the Buddha.

It’s through understanding, mindfulness, awareness, and clarity that we can turn to relinquishment and find that that’s where our satisfaction lies. It’s where our peace lies. Our well-being and clarity lie in the relinquishment itself. Mindfulness of breathing gives us a tangible approach to something that could easily be perceived as some kind of philosophical doctrine or religious belief.