# Awakening Through the Noble Truths

How can we live in the world skillfully? One aspect of right view, in a more worldly sense, is the recognition that we are the owners of our actions. Understanding this, we can actually create causes for well-being and happiness for ourselves, as well as for others. A deeper aspect of right view is the right view of the Four Noble Truths: there is dukkha, there is the cause of dukkha, there is the cessation of dukkha, and there is the path leading to the cessation of dukkha.

Our lives revolve around the sense of self and other, being and non-being, trying to get and trying to push away. This is ordinary. The view of me and others is deeply ingrained, with the focal point on me. The right view of the Four Noble Truths takes it away from the personal. The Buddha is encouraging us to reflect in terms of experience, cause and effect, skillful and unskillful, wholesome and unwholesome. These perspectives are less personal so we can reflect with a bit more clarity, spaciousness, and understanding on how these processes work.

Dukkha—normally translated as suffering, unsatisfactoriness, dis-ease, or stress—is an unskillful effect. The cause that brings about that dukkha is an unskillful cause. The cessation of dukkha, the ending of suffering or stress, is a skillful effect; it’s a desired effect. We want to be free from any kind of discontent, dissatisfaction, and dis-ease. The path leading to the cessation of dukkha is a skillful cause. If we desire this effect, then we’ll need to put in the causes. Nothing comes into being without a cause. It’s a spacious way of looking at ourselves and the world around us so that we’re not getting too tangled up in or tortured with the kinds of assessments and judgments around “me” and “mine.”

In reality we are hardwired to want happiness and well-being, but the Buddha understood that there are many different levels of happiness. There is the fleeting pleasure of the senses, the happiness of our relationships and connections with other people, and the happiness of goodness. But due to that sense of self, ownership, and identity, we end up getting tangled up with attachment. We tend to bounce around between happiness and suffering, joy and sorrow, pain and pleasure. Even when things are going really well, seeking and propping up happiness and well-being gets tiring.

The Buddha is very specific: if there was no happiness, people would not get attached to it and would not get entangled and stuck. One of the goals of the Buddha’s path is peace and freedom. The Buddha is giving us the opportunity to move beyond happiness, the opportunity for peace and a sense of happiness that isn’t shaken by anything. The Buddha actually says, “Nibbānaṃ paramaṃ sukhaṃ,” nibbāna is the highest happiness (Dhp 204). It’s a refinement of happiness—it’s not gratification that hops, shifts, and changes.

These Four Noble Truths, set up in the time of the Buddha, follow a classical medical model. You look at the symptoms of the disease, you look for the cause, you look for the prognosis, and then you look for the treatment. The Buddha compared himself to a doctor treating the ills of the world. The primary ill of the world is this feeling of discontent, dissatisfaction, dis-ease, stress. The Buddha is pointing to it as a symptom of a disease. There is a cause. If it were the primary and only unmitigated condition, then we couldn’t do anything about it. But the Buddha observed that this is an illness that has a cause. You go to a doctor and the doctor asks, “What are the symptoms? Where does it hurt? What does it feel like?” If you say, “I’m fine. It doesn’t hurt,” the doctor can’t treat you.

We need to understand: What are the symptoms? What is the cause? This is where the Buddha points to the different forms of desire and attachment and clinging. Is it hopeless? No, there is the possibility of cessation of dukkha, freedom from suffering. That is the prognosis—that the ending of dukkha is possible. There is a course of treatment: the Noble Eightfold Path.

The Buddha is not pointing to the Four Noble Truths as something that is to be believed in and blindly accepted. The Buddha is extremely practical. He is giving us the tools to explore so we can figure it out for ourselves. In the same way, a doctor can’t really make us get better. They can give us medicine, a course of treatment, but we have to take the medicine. We have to look after ourselves so that whatever illness we have will abate and go away. The practice of Dhamma is this course of treatment for the underlying difficulty inherent in our existence.

The Buddha points to three main aspects of dukkha. There’s dukkha-dukkha, the dukkha that is actually painful, that is uncomfortable, that is unsatisfactory—the actual feeling of pain when we experience grief, loss, frustration, or whatever. In his first discourse the Buddha says, “Birth is dukkha; aging is dukkha; illness is dukkha; death is dukkha; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are dukkha.” We live in physical bodies that get tired; they age. We’re awash with all sorts of different feelings and reactions, and there is an inherent discomfort there. Dukkha almost invariably keeps us off balance, keeps us uncomfortable. This is ordinary, but it’s to be taken note of, reflected on, and investigated. How do we ameliorate the dukkha? It’s not that we’re endlessly putting up with it. You have to put forth the effort to figure out ways to settle it.

The Buddha points to another kind of dukkha, vipariṇāma-dukkha—the dukkha of separation. This is the separation from pleasure, happiness, and well-being. It is deeply disturbing when we’re feeling happy or pleasant and then it ends. In reality, however refined it is, it always has to end. This is the suffering some meditators experience when they’ve had peaceful, blissful states of mind that eventually disappear, leaving a sense of grief for the loss. The reality is that it’s not possible to sustain those experiences permanently. This is the dukkha of separation: when things change, when things aren’t going how we want them to be or how we assumed they were going to be. That’s dukkha.

I remember Ajahn Chah saying that we create many problems around our lives, our existence, and what we do. Our problems are similar to somebody who wants ducks to be chickens. They think, “Why is this duck like this? It should be more like a chicken.” Well, chickens are chickens and ducks are ducks. It’s that simple. When it’s put it in that light, it seems really absurd. But how much time, energy, and emotional investment do we put into wanting the world to be other than it is, wanting the people around us to be other than the way they are, wanting ourselves to be other than the way we are, and then struggling and feeling pain because of that?

There have to be skillful causes in place for skillful effects to manifest. When we step back from personal identification and investment in self, we can look at things in a broader, more spacious manner. This gives us a perspective of the cause and effect process and the process of investigating what’s skillful and what’s unskillful. The Buddha is very clear and pointed: one, it’s ordinary; two, one doesn’t have to buy into that dukkha, that dissatisfaction. One can observe things. One of the insights that takes one past, through, and beyond dukkha, is the idiom “knowledge and vision of the way things truly are.” It’s the clear knowledge and understanding of the true nature of things. It can’t be other than that. That’s where a sense of real happiness and ease comes from.

There is dukkha that’s actually pain and discomfort. There’s dukkha that’s separation from the pleasant, separation from happiness and comfort. A third form of dukkha that the Buddha points to is saṅkhāra-dukkha. A saṅkhāra is anything of a compounded nature. For something to be of a compounded nature, it’s constructed. To have anything constructed, it has to have different components and pieces. Everything around us of a material nature is constructed in some way; our mental states and our emotions are all constructed. When something is constructed, all of the different components are out of our control. They’re going to follow all sorts of different agendas. Sometimes they’re working against themselves or at cross-purposes. It doesn’t necessarily mean good or bad; it’s the way things are. The complexity of our existence means that things are changing, shifting, moving, coming to be, and ceasing. On a certain level, we don’t have a whole lot of control. Some of it can be a bit disturbing. Some of it can be really amazing.

An example is the way our bodies heal. The body is incredibly complex. It wants to heal. I remember when our next-door neighbor was dying of cancer. We would go over there every day to visit and sometimes help look after her. One day she had a fall that resulted in a bit of a cut on her forehead. Her life forces were clearly fading as a result of the cancer but, at the same time, you could visibly see the wound healing. So, the body is trying to heal itself at the same time that it’s falling apart. That’s what our human existence is like, all these different processes. It’s a bit disconcerting. Often we don’t even notice it, but that complexity is dukkha. It is the nature of things, but it also leaves a sense of dis-ease, a sense of being slightly off-balance.

Seeing these different aspects of dukkha is important for the cultivation of the Four Noble Truths. Understanding dukkha gives us both a clarity and a motivation as to how we work with this. What tools are helpful and appropriate for overcoming this dukkha? The Buddha gives the Noble Eightfold Path and this process of sīla, samādhi, and paññā: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. This path is also constructed, compounded: it’s a saṅkhāra. It can be developed, leading to peace, to understanding, to well-being, and to a sense of being truly awake.

With the cultivation of these Four Noble Truths, there’s the possibility of freedom from suffering. Each of the Noble Truths has a corresponding duty or response that we have to give appropriate attention to. Suffering is to be understood; it’s to be known clearly. That seems counterintuitive. Who wants to understand dukkha? We just want to get rid of it. That habit, of course, keeps us skimming the surface. We don’t see or clearly understand.

The cause of dukkha is to be abandoned, to be let go of. We tend to go about it backwards. We want to abandon suffering, to let go of suffering, but when it isn’t known—when it isn’t understood clearly—then the cause is still simmering underneath. If you get a cut on your arm you can put a Band-Aid on and then you don’t have to see it anymore. But if you haven’t cleaned it properly, if you haven’t put some kind of antibiotic cream on it before putting on the Band-Aid, it’s going to get infected. Similarly, with our own dukkha, when it’s not understood, when we haven’t cleaned up our understanding of dukkha, then we can’t really let go of it.

Seeing and understanding dukkha doesn’t mean wallowing in dukkha: it means understanding and reflecting on it. Where is this? What is the cause? What is this origin? Where is its place of origin? The Buddha is always pointing back to taṇhā, desire that is inevitably bound up with greed, hatred, delusion. It’s inextricably bound up with defilement and attachment. It’s a special and prevalent kind of desire.

One form of desire is kāma-taṇhā, sensual desire, seeking gratification, stimulation from the senses. I’m happy when I see, hear, smell, taste, touch, or think things that are agreeable and pleasant. It’s not the experience itself that causes dukkha. When we relate to it with desire, pinning all of our hopes on maintaining that gratification, then we’re at a great disadvantage.

The desire for being or becoming, bhava-taṇhā, is more around the sense of self, me, becoming, being, trying to be somebody, trying to make an impression on somebody. How many times do we walk into a room trying to present ourselves in a certain way? That’s a desire for being, a desire for becoming. As long as we’re invested in trying to prop that up, we are carrying a burden.

The desire for non-being, non-becoming, vibhava-taṇhā, is that sense of pushing away, resistance, aversion, the feeling that it shouldn’t be like this, I shouldn’t be like this, the world shouldn’t be like this. That leaves us very unbalanced, uncentered.

These forms of desire are fundamental to our existence, but we need to investigate and contemplate this. We need to see clearly how it works. On a certain level, it’s very simple, very basic. But simple things keep spreading out and creating problems for us.

One time, somebody who was very learned and well read came to visit Wat Pah Pong and asked Ajahn Chah, “What is the essence, the heart of the Buddha’s teachings? What’s the central piece, the most important part of the Buddha’s teachings and thoughts?” Ajahn Chah picked up a piece of wood that was near his seat and asked the visitor, “Is this a big piece of wood or a little piece of wood?” The person, who was asking in a very formal, religious, and theoretical way, was befuddled. “I don’t understand.” Ajahn Chah said, “Well, if you wanted to build a house, you’d say, ‘This is a little piece of wood.’ If you just wanted to pick something out of your tooth, you’d say, ‘That’s a really big piece of wood. That’s too big.’”

We’re constantly creating our perception and evaluation of the world and ourselves through the lens of desire; we’re judging it all the time. The problem of our existence is in desire and creating discontent, dissatisfaction, dis-ease. So, in Buddhist practice, we need to understand dukkha—how it’s formed and what sort of desire is there. We need to pay attention to abandoning and relinquishing these different forms of desire.

When we do that, we will experience a sense of ease, a sense of well-being, a release, or a cessation of suffering. It may not be complete and final nibbāna, but it is a cessation of suffering. We have to pay attention so that when we do experience a release from suffering, difficulty or complication, we actually realize it. So often we’re on to the next thing according to our desires: “I need more samādhi. I need more insight.” We keep seeking the next experience, and we don’t realize a cessation, an ending, a settling of suffering, of discontent, of dissatisfaction. Pay attention and make it real. Don’t keep skipping over and missing it. With a lack of mindfulness, clear comprehension, and discernment, we lose sight of what’s really important.

The path leading to the cessation of suffering is to be developed and cultivated. This means putting in the causes for a skillful effect. The cessation of dukkha is the place of rest and deep peace.

The Four Noble Truths are a way of looking at our experience, laying out the tools to develop an understanding and leading us to peace, happiness, and freedom. The Buddha calls this a happiness that is unalloyed: it’s not tainted by anything. In some ways, the Four Noble Truths are like kindergarten teachings for Buddhism, but really it is the essence. This is the Buddha’s very first teaching that he taught to his first five disciples. It came from a fully-awakened mind. Think about the power of a fully awakened being—the power of clarity that the Buddha carried with him. Although his first inclination was that nobody would actually understand this, compassion arose. As the Buddha walked from his place of awakening, Bodh Gaya, to Sarnath, where he gave this teaching, he had time to reflect on how he might be able to teach what he had learned. Through the power of a fully-awakened mind responding with compassion, these Four Noble Truths were taught. Through his entire forty-five years of teaching, these Four Noble Truths were expounded on, presented from different angles, manifesting in all the different teachings that he gave.

The Buddha said that these Four Noble Truths were like the elephant’s footprint. The footprints of all animals, whether they’re lions, tigers, dogs, cats, cows, or sheep, they all fit in the footprint of the elephant. In the same way, all the different teachings fit into the Four Noble Truths. Repeatedly, throughout the Buddha’s life, the Buddha said, “I teach only two things: dukkha and the ending of dukkha.” These Four Noble Truths are part and parcel, pointing to this possibility of understanding and practice, that there is a liberation that is possible. The Buddha experienced this himself, through his effort and practice. He felt certain that this is what would really bring about true happiness. Nibbāna is the highest happiness because it’s not built on desire. It’s not built on identity. It is something that can be realized and experienced.