The Secret of Happiness
Ajahn Candasirī

THIS SMALL VOLUME IS DEDICATED TO MY LONG-STANDING  
KALYĀNAMITTA, AJAHN SUNDARĀ, WHO HAS SHARED A GREAT MANY OF  
THE UPS, DOWNS AND THORNY BITS ALONG THE WAY; ALSO, TO ALL THE  
OTHER SISTERS (BROWN OR WHITE *) WHO, OVER THE YEARS, HAVE BEEN  
AND CONTINUE TO BE FAITHFUL MIRRORS AND GUIDES.  
I AM DEEPLY GRATEFUL TO THEM AL L.
*This refers to the colour of robes worn by sīladharā nuns (brown) and 8 precept novices or 
anagārikās (white).

7
Introduction and Acknowledgements
This small book came about following a day of practice 
organized by the Buddhist Women’s Network (BWN) held 
at Amaravati Buddhist Monastery in August 2019. Almost 
all of the meditations and reflections were offered that 
day, with the exception of ‘Generosity, Contentment 
and Gratitude’, a short essay written during the 2021
winter retreat.
The idea for the topic and title, ‘The Secret of Happiness’, 
came about after reflecting on my first meeting with Ajahn 
Sumedho in 1977, just a few weeks after his arrival in the 
UK. I had been very impressed by the sense of ease and joy 
that he seemed to carry with him. That, in itself, it was re -
markable. What made it even more remarkable was what I 
had been told about the monks: that they followed an ex -
tremely exacting way of life and a discipline that required

8
them to rise at 4.00 a.m. for meditation, and to eat only 
one meal a day before noon. They had no money, no enter -
tainment, no sexual contact of any kind. The list of things 
they had given up was long – and yet… and yet… they 
seemed deeply happy and at ease. My question was, ‘Was 
it in spite of this Rule – or because of it?…’ I began to suspect 
the latter. It became clear to me that true happiness can 
only arise in a heart that is not troubled with remorse or 
regret about unskilful speech or actions; and that true ease 
and contentment arise out of simplicity – from the paring 
away of possessions and activities simply to what is needed
for survival.
Of course, for most people, such standards are unrealistic,
but the basic principles still apply: living carefully and
responsibly, and simplifying our lives, leads to less stress
and more happiness. I’ll say more about that later on.

9
There are several guided meditations included and I would 
suggest that you make a recording, reading out the text – 
slowly, and with appropriate pauses. This can be used as a 
support for your own practice, or shared with others. If you 
practise with others regularly, you could also take turns to 
read out the text as a guide for your partner or others in 
the group.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge those people who 
have contributed their time, effort and skills to enable the 
teachings to be offered in this way. Firstly, the Amaravati 
retreat managers who organized the event at the insti -
gation of the BWN, and arranged for the recording to be 
made. Their gentle support and unflappability have sup -
ported me, and countless others, through a great many 
days of practice at Amaravati. Adam Long, encouraging, 
enthusiastic and immensely skilled as ever, transcribed the 
recordings and provided an initial edit. Joanna Dowey took

10
up the daunting task of arranging and ordering the Q&A 
section, as well as offering numerous suggestions. Ajahn 
Sucitto has kindly offered to review the text in order to 
correct any obvious errors, and enable a presentation that 
can be most accessible to those for whom it is intended. 
Maureen Bodenbach made some extremely helpful sugges -
tions, and Eleonora Monti brought her professional eye to 
proofread the text. I’m particularly grateful to my philoso -
pher brother, David Cockburn; he took time to read it, and 
to make some thought-provoking comments. Finally, Nick 
Halliday, whose design skills and knowledge have enabled 
the physical manifestation of ‘The Secret of Happiness’ .
May it serve as a support and encouragement for all those 
setting out on the Buddhist Path of Liberation – and a re -
minder for those already on the Path and who may have 
forgotten, in the scramble to arrive at the destination, to 
enjoy the journey!

Key to Abbreviations
 M MAJJH ĪMA NIK ĀYA ( WISDOM PUBLICATIONS
  1995 TRANSLATED BY BHIKKHU ÑĀNAMOLI
  AND BHIKKHU BODHI)
 DHP  DHAMMAPADA (A RENDERING BY AJAHN
  MUNINDO – ARUNA PUBLICATIONS, 2016)
 A ANGUTTARA NIK ĀYA (WISDOM PUBLICATIONS,
  TRANSLATED BY BHIKKHU BODHI, © 2012)
  VIN. MV.: VINAYA PITAKA - MAH ĀVAGGA

14
What  is the purpose and benefit
of wholesome virtuous behaviour ? 
For a virtuous person, one whose behaviour is virtuous, 
no volition need be exerted: ‘Let non-regret arise in me.’ It 
is natural that non-regret arises in a virtuous person, one 
whose behaviour is virtuous.
For one without regret, no volition need be exerted: ‘Let 
joy arise in me.’ It is natural that joy arises in one without 
regret.
For one who is joyful, no volition need be exerted: ‘Let rap -
ture arise in me.’
For one with a rapturous mind no volition need be exerted: 
‘Let my body be tranquil.’
For one tranquil in body, no volition need be exerted: ‘Let 
me feel pleasure.’

15
For one feeling pleasure, no volition need be exerted: ‘Let 
my mind be concentrated.’
For one who is concentrated, no volition need be exerted: 
‘Let me know and see things as they really are.’
For one who knows and sees things as they really are, no 
volition need be exerted: ‘Let me be disenchanted and 
dispassionate.’
For one who is disenchanted and dispassionate, no volition 
need be exerted: ‘Let me realize the knowledge and vision 
of liberation.’
Thus bhikkhus, one stage flows into the next stage, one 
stage fills up the next stage, for going from the near shore 
to the far shore.
(A.10:1)

17
Three Refuges and Five Precepts
I chose ‘The Secret of Happiness’ as a title, both for the origi -
nal workshop and for this book, because I thought that 
everybody would be interested and would want to discover 
the secret of happiness! But it’s not really a secret. You 
don’t have to look very far to see what brings happiness, 
and what undermines it. 
In our society, there is plenty of encouragement to reach 
out for whatever it is that you imagine will bring happiness. 
People may think that once they have a successful career, 
lots of money, a nice house, wonderful kids – then they’ll 
be happy. Unfortunately, many people who have all those 
things aren’t very happy… It seems that getting things just 
leads to wanting more things. You get the most wonderful 
house – but then you want a bigger house, a better house. 
You buy the latest, most fantastic computer – and within

18
two years, it’s no good; people say you should put it on the 
rubbish heap. ‘You must have this computer with this system! 
It’s much faster, and has more capabilities…’ Bigger. Better. 
Faster. Does that make us happy? I think not.
I’d like to begin by saying something about the Three 
Refuges and the Five Precepts which are helpful guides; 
these are an important foundation for us, if we want to 
discover the secret of happiness. That might be a bit of a 
surprise to you but I think that, over time, it will come to 
make perfect sense. 
When you look carefully into the teachings of the Buddha 
you’ll find that they are simply what we might call ‘com -
mon sense’. So I suppose the biggest secret of happiness is 
that it’s simply common sense – but unfortunately, we’re 
not always terribly sensible. That’s the main difficulty. So, 
let’s start with talking about the Three Refuges and the 
Five Precepts.

19
As we were doing the puja, even those of you who are un -
familiar with the teaching will have noticed that we bowed 
three times. You will also have heard the three words: 
Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha. Now the Buddha, Dhamma and 
Sangha are what we refer to as the Three Refuges, or the 
Triple Gem. These enduring qualities can be likened to 
a place of complete safety, or seen as most precious and 
beautiful jewels. 
The word ‘Buddha’ refers to the quality of awakened 
awareness. It also, of course, refers to the historical figure 
of Siddhartha Gotama who became the Buddha, and who 
lived and taught two thousand five hundred years ago. 
In the scriptures it says that the Buddha shared his un -
derstanding for the benefit, welfare and happiness of gods
and humans. I often remind people of this, because some -
times we can be too intense and serious about our practice.

20
I managed to spend a lot of time being totally miserable, 
because I always thought that my practice wasn’t good 
enough. But then I’d remember that the Buddha gave this 
teaching for our welfare and happiness , not to make us feel 
hopeless or guilty or unworthy. The teachings were offered 
to lift us up, to make us feel glad. 
So now we can celebrate the opportunity we have to spend 
a whole day contemplating these teachings, so as to better 
understand how to live with well-being and joy. Remember 
that we do this for our own welfare, and also for the wel -
fare of those we live with; in fact, it’s for the welfare of ev -
erybody. We can’t know the effect that one smile can have 
on somebody’s day… 
The Buddha is one who is awake, who is alert, who under -
stands things as they are – one who sees things in a clear, 
undeluded way. This is the first Refuge, the first gem.

21
The second Refuge is the Dhamma. The traditional inter -
pretation of ‘Dhamma’ is the ‘Teachings of the Buddha’. 
The scriptures are vast; they all point to a truth that each of 
us can experience directly. So ‘Dhamma’ means the teach -
ings that point to a truth and also, more significantly, the 
Truth itself. Each one of us has the capacity to realize this 
– just by being fully present. It is not the same as any ideas 
you may have: about who and what you are, or what you 
think you should do in your life. Dhamma is Truth, or real -
ity, as you experience it, right now: this breath, this body 
and mind. This is the second Refuge, the second Gem: the 
teachings that point to the Truth you can realize for your -
self, when you are fully present and mindful.  
The third Refuge is the Sangha, or the community. Sangha 
represents those people who are sincere in their aspiration 
to realize Truth. There can be enormous value in practising 
together in a group; we support each other in our aspiration

22
as we work towards what is wholesome, what is good. 
There are all kinds of other groups that practise together 
doing different things that may not be so skilful. Engaging 
in such activities can bring an immediate gratification
but in the longer term may not make you feel so good. 
After his enlightenment, the Buddha spent forty-five years 
teaching, guiding and encouraging others in their prac -
tice of freeing the heart from suffering. These disciples, 
through applying the teachings in their own lives, came to 
realize the Truth for themselves. Then they would teach 
others, passing it on to the next generation. Two thousand 
five hundred years is a long time – countless women and 
men have heard the teachings and applied them so that, 
right now, we can all share in this opportunity to practise 
according to the Buddha’s teachings. In addition to the historical community, we can also think of Sangha as our own 
inner aspiration and sincerity.

23
When taking the Five Precepts, it’s the custom to begin by 
establishing oneself in these Three Refuges.
The Five Precepts are the standard that everybody takes as 
a training while staying in the monastery. Personally, I like 
to encourage making a lifetime commitment, but I appreciate that for some people that may be asking too much. Not 
everyone is quite ready to do that, but here in the monas -
tery everyone does their best to keep at least Five Precepts. 
You can then consider the possibility to making a longerterm commitment, if you have not already done so. 
The Five Precepts are: 
1. To refrain from deliberately causing harm to any liv -
ing creature.
2. To refrain from taking things that haven’t been given. 
This includes stealing, cheating – taking anything that 
one is not entitled to.

24
3. To refrain from sexual misconduct. We don’t exploit 
others for our own pleasure; we’re careful about how 
we relate to one another.
4. To refrain from wrong speech. This is often inter -
preted as lying, but it also includes divisive speech, 
harsh or abusive speech, and pointless chatter. 
5. To refrain from the use of intoxicants. This one is 
important. Some very foolish mistakes can be made un -
der the influence of alcohol or recreational drugs. You 
might feel wonderful at the time but with intoxication 
the perception is distorted, and many harmful things 
can be done or said. 
I think this is one of the most significant precepts. It
doesn’t include medically prescribed drugs – and it doesn’t
include tea or coffee. Fortunately, these are allowed.
These training guidelines are vital supports for living hap -
pily in this human realm. It might seem that you are being

25
asked to give up things that you enjoy but when you look 
closely, you can see that those things do not usually lead 
to true happiness. There may often be a tinge of regret 
or remorse associated with simply gratifying our desires 
to get something we like, or to get rid of what we don’t 
like. Whereas, if you keep the precepts with sincerity, they 
generate a natural sense of well-being. Living as a nun, I’ve 
kept these precepts as best I could for over forty years. As 
a result, I feel glad because even though I’ve made many 
mistakes, I know that I haven’t deliberately done anything 
that seriously harmed anybody. Of course, everybody 
makes mistakes, and it’s normal to feel some regret; the 
important thing is to not allow yourself to be pulled into a 
sense of guilt or unworthiness, or to linger in the memory 
of those unfortunate events. Rather, establish presence 
and, with wise reflection, consider: ‘OK. That wasn’t very 
good. What can I learn from it?…’

26
So the precepts are a support, like a trellis for plants. You 
make a trellis and install it; then you plant the seeds or 
seedlings along beside it, so they can be supported as they 
grow towards the sun. In the same way, we have these pre -
cepts to help us to grow in a good direction towards perfect 
understanding. 
Happiness, Mindfulness
and Two Kinds of Thought
At the conclusion of the formal taking of the precepts, 
there is a final section which is chanted by the leader. The 
English translation of this is:
‘These are the Five Precepts.
Virtue is a source of happiness.
Virtue is a source of true wealth.
Virtue is a source of peacefulness.
Therefore, let virtue be purified.’

27
Instead of ‘virtue’, I prefer to use the word ‘goodness’. You 
are establishing goodness as a reliable foundation for your 
practice. It’s a commitment to turn towards the Refuges 
of Wisdom, Truth and Goodness, and to live carefully and 
responsibly in a way that doesn’t cause harm to yourself 
or to others. This is a significant undertaking. It may seem 
simple, but it is a fundamental training for anyone who is 
serious about cultivating the happiness of liberation.
Mindfulness Meditation
Twenty years ago, I made a commitment to be happy. This 
was following a severe illness when I almost died. Nine 
months prior to that I had been on a pilgrimage to the 
Buddhist Holy Places to mark my fiftieth birthday. Early 
on, my companion and I had an apparently random en -
counter on a train which we hadn’t planned to take. At one 
station we stopped at, three young men boarded and sat

28
opposite. One of them began to look at the others’ palms. 
They seemed friendly, so as their conversation drew to a 
close, my friend and I held out our palms to see what he 
might have to say. When he looked at mine, he made sev -
eral rather pertinent comments, finishing with, ‘Your life 
line is quite short. You may live to about fifty.’ (!)
From my point of view, this was the most significant event 
of the whole pilgrimage. Of course, I didn’t take it com -
pletely seriously – but I couldn’t dismiss it either. It got 
me reflecting on the fact that even if I didn’t die at fifty, 
I was not going to continue forever. I also naturally began 
to consider my life, what I needed to do, and how I wanted 
to live… Aside from expressing appreciation or regret to 
people with whom I had had significant relationships, the 
simple thought came that the most important thing is to 
enjoy life. This may sound idealistic. How can we enjoy the 
pain, sorrows and tragedies, the ghastly things that all of us

29
must expect to encounter? …I needed to find another way 
of conveying this sense: ‘ experiencing life ’; ‘appreciating life ’; 
‘being there for life’; ‘living life fully’ all come close. 
Knowing that our life will end at some point makes every -
thing about it precious. I don’t want to waste it – I want to 
be there for all of it; in other words, to be mindful. I also 
want to make the best use of the time that I have to learn 
about suffering, the ways that we struggle in our lives – and 
to avoid doing that any more. I became particularly inter -
ested in learning what undermines a sense of well-being; it 
became clear to me that hostility, ill-will, anxiety and wor -
ry are bad news – if we want to be happy. I also understood 
that it is possible to live free from these things. Of course, 
we all want to be happy but, until then, it had never oc -
curred to me that there are things that we can consciously 
work on to generate well-being.  
Here is a quote from the Dhammapada, a collection of

30
deceptively simple and profound teachings of the Buddha:
‘All states of being are determined by mind. It is the mind 
that leads the way. Just as the wheel of the oxcart follows the 
hoofprint of the animal that pulls it, so suffering will surely 
follow when we speak or act impulsively from an impure state 
of mind.’ (DHP .1)
The phrase ‘An impure state of mind’ means a state of mind 
filled with greed or aversion and ill-will, wishing harm ei -
ther to ourselves or to somebody else. One consequence of 
this mind-state is that we act or speak impulsively, without 
considering the consequences of our action or speech. This 
happens to all of us, and it can be a cause for unhappiness 
or regret. 
Then the second verse: 
‘All states of being are determined by mind. It is mind that 
leads the way. As surely as our shadow never leaves us, so

31
happiness will follow, when we speak or act from a pure state 
of mind.’ (DHP .2)
Very simple, isn’t it? Of course, it’s easier said than done! 
This is where meditation comes in. Through meditation 
and mindfulness training, we learn about our minds; we 
learn how to be aware of different kinds of thought that 
arise in the mind. Gradually, we develop skill in immediately recognizing any thought that’s going to undermine wellbeing. We begin to distinguish between those thoughts that 
we need to be careful about, and thoughts to be cultivated 
and allowed to grow.
There’s one more teaching that I would like to share with 
you. It’s a teaching that comes from before the Buddha 
was fully enlightened. He saw clearly that there are some 
thoughts that are helpful, and other thoughts that are less 
helpful; so he divided his thoughts into two different kinds.

32
Unhelpful thoughts included thoughts of ill-will, thoughts 
of cruelty and thoughts of lust, or greed. I think we could 
also include thoughts of doubt or confusion.  
Reading from the text : 
‘As I abided diligent, ardent and resolute, a thought of ill-will 
arose in me. And I understood this leads to my own afflic -
tion, to the affliction of others and to the affliction of both. 
It obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties and leads away from 
Nibbāna. When I considered thus, it subsided in me. Whenever 
a thought of cruelty or ill-will arose in me, I abandoned it, re -
moved it, did away with it.’ (M.19: 4-5)  
Through meditation, we learn how to recognize when 
there’s something that’s not helpful arising in the mind, 
and then to abandon it. As I said before, this can be easier 
said than done. 
The other kind of thoughts, those that support clarity and

33
well-being, are thoughts of generosity and renunciation, 
thoughts of non-ill-will (or kindness) and thoughts of noncruelty (or compassion). 
Again, reading from the sutta: 
‘The thought of non-cruelty has arisen in me. This does not 
lead to my own affliction or to other’s affliction or to the af -
fliction of both. It aids wisdom, does not cause difficulties and 
leads to Nibbāna. If I think and ponder upon this thought even 
for a night, even for a day, even for a night and a day, I see 
nothing to fear from it.’ (M.19: 9-10)  
Then in the sutta, he uses a wonderful simile about cows:  
‘Just as in the last month of the rainy season, in the autumn 
when the crops thicken, a cowherd would guard his cows by 
constantly tapping and poking them on this side and that with 
a stick to check and curb them. Why is that? Because he sees 
that he could be flogged, imprisoned, fined or blamed if he let

34
them stray into the crops. So too, I saw in unwholesome states 
danger, degradation, defilement. And in wholesome states the 
blessings of renunciation.’ (M.19:7)  
So in your own practice, when you see that an unwhole -
some thought has arisen, you need to prod it and poke it! 
You need to be constantly watchful. Don’t let it take root.  
With the other kind of thoughts, thoughts of generosity 
and renunciation, thoughts of kindness and compassion, 
the Buddha says this: 
‘Just as in the last month of the hot season when all the crops 
have been brought inside the villages, the cowherd would 
guard his cows while staying at the root of a tree or out in 
the open, since he only needs to be mindful that the cows are 
there. So too, there was need only for me to be mindful that the 
states are there.’ (M.19: 12)  
You see? He makes a clear distinction between the two

35
kinds of thought. He is extremely watchful around the 
thoughts of ill-will. We too need to learn to recognize such 
thoughts, and to abandon them straightaway. Whereas 
with the wholesome thoughts, mindfulness that they are 
there is sufficient; although there is also mention in the 
sutta of the need to take care to avoid excessive excitement 
and becoming carried away by our ‘good ideas’, as this can 
tire the mind and body. I find this helpful to consider.
Meditation
There are many techniques and schools of meditation; 
people use the word, ‘meditation’ to mean different things. 
When I give a guided meditation it’s an encouragement 
to be present, to learn how to be present. If you’ve never 
meditated, that probably sounds rather strange. You’ll 
probably think, ‘Well of course I’m present, I’m here!’ But when 
you start meditating, you can begin to see how much of

36
the time you are not present. I don’t mean that in any 
critical way; it’s just a fact. It is a habit of the mind to be 
somewhere else, to be thinking about the past or future, or 
vaguely worrying or daydreaming about this or that. Being 
fully present is not something that comes naturally to 
most of us. Often, we make things complicated; we become
caught up with thinking about all kinds of things.  
Meditation is a way of training the mind to be present, 
it supports presence of mind. People have spoken about 
the possibility of emptying the mind of thoughts; I think 
it’s important to realize that that doesn’t necessarily 
happen automatically. It’s possible, and there are people 
who can forcibly suppress thoughts. They just decide to 
not think. They grit their teeth, and stop thinking for a 
while. But for most of us it doesn’t happen so easily and, 
in fact, forceable suppression of thought is not a practice 
I’d recommend. What I would encourage is to see it more

37
like riding downhill on a bicycle. When you need to stop, 
you gently squeeze the brakes so that the bicycle slows 
gradually. If you put the brakes on suddenly, you tumble 
over the handlebars! Meditation techniques can support a 
gradual slowing down, coming to a state of being a little
bit more settled. 
It’s good to remember that all of you have come from situ -
ations where you’ve been quite active. However, now that 
you’re here in the monastery, sitting still, trying to quietly 
be with the breath, there’s not much stimulation. If you’ve 
come from London, you will have had to deal with traffic 
and buses, and goodness knows what else, on your journey 
here. That’s a lot of stimulation. Then there are the inter -
actions, jobs, families – generally, the mind is constantly 
stimulated; that is what it is familiar with. When you come 
to a situation where there’s less stimulation, it can take a 
little while for the mind to settle down.

38
So please don’t think that your meditation is terrible, just 
because you’ve got a few thoughts in your mind. What is 
terrible is when people decide they can’t meditate because 
of thinking! I’d like to encourage you by saying that the 
practice is simply to be present with things as they are. 
If the mind is thinking, know that it is thinking. That is 
what’s going on in the present. If you’re upset and angry, 
know that you’re feeling upset and angry; there can be a 
quality of presence with that. 
Presence is different from reacting: ‘I shouldn’t have these 
thoughts! I’m a terrible person! Getting it all wrong! I’m hope -
less!’ ...Can you see how such thinking makes you tense 
up? It prolongs it and makes it worse – and it doesn’t 
make us happy. It doesn’t improve anything. Whereas, in 
meditation, we’re learning to hold the mind gently – to 
create a gentle, peaceful container where it can develop
a sense of settling.

39
We need to appreciate too that by the end of this day of 
retreat, the mind may still not be totally settled – even 
if you’ve practised with great sincerity. However, you’ll 
probably feel a little bit more settled; you may even notice 
a few gaps between the thoughts. That is something to feel 
good about. Even if you don’t have any gaps, perhaps you 
just recognize that there are many thoughts in the mind. 
That is already a good step. If your mind wanders, and you 
see that your mind is wandering, just noticing that is cause 
for celebration. So you can all feel good about your prac -
tice. Just being able to recognize what is happening in the 
mind is already a significant insight.

GUIDANCE

SITTING MEDITATION
When preparing to meditate, it’s good to take time to find 
a comfortable sitting position. If you are on the floor and 
you can sit cross-legged in the lotus or half-lotus posture, 
that’s ideal. Kneeling, using a meditation bench is also 
fine – and if you need to sit on a chair, that’s fine too. The 
important thing is to find a position that works for you, a 
position that supports alertness, not so comfortable that 
you fall asleep. However, if you do fall asleep, please don’t 
worry about it! Of course, I wouldn’t encourage it, but it 
can happen sometimes – particularly if you are very tired.  
Sit up nice and straight if you can, and take the time to find 
a good position for the head – holding it up so that, if your 
eyes are open, you are looking straight ahead. If you prefer 
to close the eyes, gently close them maintaining the same 
position so that you’re nicely upright.

GUIDANCE

Take time now to set the body at ease. Relax the body, 
keeping it upright and as comfortable as possible. Bring 
the awareness to points of contact with the mat, the floor, 
or the chair that you’re sitting on. Notice a sense of pres -
sure there: if you sit for a very long time that can become 
quite uncomfortable, but to start with it’s alright. Notice 
that. Then if during the meditation you feel it becoming 
uncomfortable, try relaxing a bit. If that doesn’t ease the 
discomfort, feel free to gently change position.
Now... just be aware of the body sitting here.
Whatever the body is like – big or small, healthy or un -
healthy – just be aware of it as the body that you’re liv -
ing with. Being here, now, aware of it from the inside. You 
don’t need to worry about what it looks like. Just feel how 
it is to be fully here. Now bring awareness to the breath 
and its wonderful healing quality; enjoying the soothing 
experience of the body breathing.

42
Breathing in... Breathing out…
Imagine that you can direct this breath energy to release 
any tension from the different parts of the body; begin -
ning with the head, the scalp. It may feel quite tight. See 
if you can allow the gentle energy of the out-breath to be 
directed as if to wash through the muscles of the scalp... 
soothing… softening… You may feel the skin become 
quite loose, quite soft, as you do this …  
Bring awareness to the face. Be aware of the face, par -
ticularly the muscles of the forehead and around the 
eyes; there can be a lot of tension here. See if you can 
allow the breath energy to soothe and soften; washing 
through, releasing, letting go of all the tightness so that 
the face becomes quite loose, quite soft with no particu -
lar expression. You don’t need to be concerned about its 
appearance for now. You are feeling it from the inside;
letting it slacken and soften.

43
Next come to the shoulder area where there can be a lot of 
tension, particularly if you have been in a stressful situa -
tion: doing complicated work, or driving. Breathe through 
the muscles around the shoulders; feel them drop slightly 
as you do this. It can be like putting down a big burden…  
Notice the weight of the arms. Breathe down through the 
muscles of the upper arms; the lower arms; around the 
wrists, palms and fingers so that the hands rest, loosely, 
on the lap or knees – whatever’s comfortable for you.  
Now bring awareness into the trunk of the body, starting 
with the chest area, the heart centre. Imagine that you can 
breathe in and then out through that centre, enabling a 
softening, an opening of the heart centre.  
Moving down to the solar plexus in the middle of the body: 
notice any sense of tightness or agitation there. This is 
where we experience the bodily feelings of excitement,

44
fear, anger or anxiety. Breathe gently through the solar 
plexus so as to allow a settling of those energies… 
Now breathe down into the belly. Take a full, deep 
breath in – right down into the lower abdomen, expand -
ing the whole torso. Then, when you’re ready, breathe 
out from there, slowly and comfortably. Doing this a few 
times can bring a tremendous sense of peacefulness and
well-being – even in the midst of a very busy day.  
Attend to the legs; bring them into this gentle, kindly
awareness. Breathe down through the thighs… the 
muscles around the knees… the calves… ankles and 
feet, allowing any tension, strain and stress to drain away 
through the soles of the feet. In this way you can bring a 
sense of ease and well-being to the legs. You don’t need 
to worry about whether they are big or small, fat or 
thin, stiff or supple. However they are, you can use this
breath to generate a sense of ease and bodily well-being.

45
And finally, the back part of the body, the muscles around 
the spine – the body is nicely supported so you can re -
lease any extra strain and tension from the muscles 
around the spine. Begin at the base of the skull with the 
neck area. Gently breathe away tension from around the 
neck. Bring the awareness to the back of the ribcage. 
Breathe away any extra tension from around the spine. 
Move down from the back of the ribcage to the back 
of the waist and right down to the base of the spine. 
The breath is like a gentle, kindly touch; a hand gently 
smoothing, soothing and softening the muscles around 
the spine. The body is held gently, nicely upright, with a 
sense of energy, poise and balance. Release the feelings 
of tension, strain. Let them go. Let them be. There is a 
sense of poise and balance – gentle, friendly alertness
as you continue to breathe in and out.

46
Now focus on the mechanical process of breathing, notic -
ing how the chest cavity expands with the in-breath; you 
can feel the movement of the ribs as they swing upwards 
and outwards. This allows space for the air to flow into 
the lungs. You are aware of that. You are aware of the outbreath as the air is compressed out. You observe this as it 
actually happens; here… now... 
Some of you may find it helpful to link the breathing with 
the words, ‘ Bud-’ , as you breathe in, and ‘- dho’ as you 
breathe out; or you may prefer a secular option: ‘breathing 
in… breathing out’ , or, ‘here’ as you breathe in, ‘ now’ as 
you breath out. 
If you prefer to simply be aware of the body breathing 
that’s perfectly fine too. 
The breath is used as a focus for the awareness. You will 
probably notice some thinking continuing in the mind,

47
but don’t involve yourself with those thoughts. Instead, 
gently – but firmly – turn away from them, however in -
teresting or significant they may seem. Just attend to the 
movement of the ribcage, or however you experience the 
process of breathing. You can simply enjoy the sensation
of the body breathing, as it’s happening here and now.  
If you notice that the awareness has been highjacked 
by some interesting thought or plan, worry or concern, 
calmly return to the breath: breathing in, breathing out… 
You will probably find that you need to keep coming back 
again, and again… and again… and again… learning how 
to come back without any fuss or bother – seeing each 
breath as a new beginning. Gradually the mind begins to 
settle as you begin to enjoy the process of breathing, as it’s 
happening here, now. 
Breathing in… Breathing out...

48
Introducing Standing Meditation
There are many strategies that can be used to help the 
mind to settle. Remember that the mind is sensitive: it is affected by what it’s exposed to. If you come from a stimulating background, it’s natural for the mind to feel stimulated. 
This is normal; it’s nothing to worry about. 
In order to help the mind to settle, you can use the breath, 
the body – whatever you can focus on – to establish an 
awareness of the quality of the present moment, learning 
to be peaceful with whatever may be going on. For example, 
if there is agitation you can be peaceful with the agitation, 
or there may be times during the day when you feel sleepy. 
This is one reason why I like to teach standing medita -
tion. Standing meditation is an excellent support for 
wakefulness; you are much less likely to fall asleep while 
standing! It is also a good way of generating energy. Just

49
standing for a few minutes can bring energy into the whole 
system. You can also use it as an alternative to sitting
if there is a lot of pain in the knees or back. 
Another benefit of standing meditation is that it can help 
one to integrate practice into everyday life. This is one of 
the things that I like to emphasize. There can be the as -
sumption that ‘real practice’ only happens when you are 
sitting on the mat. However, my encouragement is to un -
derstand practice as something continuous – something 
you do every moment of your life. There is much you can 
learn from standing, which is something that most of us do 
a lot of.
Often, we are waiting when we’re standing. For example, 
we may be standing in a queue at the supermarket; if it’s 
moving very slowly, we can feel a kind of impatience, 
wanting it to move faster: ‘ Hurry up! Hurry up! ’. Or we may 
be waiting for a bus. Sometimes I travel by bus, and have

50
to wait for the right bus to come along. There can be a 
bit of worry or concern as I wait: ‘Have I missed the bus?’,  
or if we’ve arranged to meet someone and they’re a little 
late, we can find ourselves thinking, ‘Maybe they don’t care. 
Maybe they’ve forgotten about our appointment to meet.’, or 
‘Maybe they’ve had an accident.’ When we’re standing and 
waiting there are endless thoughts that can arise and 
make us feel frustrated or angry, hurt, upset or worried.  
But rather than allowing such things to take over in the 
mind, it’s more helpful to ask: ‘Is this worry helpful?’, and to 
consider an alternative strategy: ‘Can I choose to not worry?’ If 
you find yourself waiting, you can use waiting as a time for 
standing meditation; it can keep you out of a lot of trouble! 
If you’re waiting for someone, the fact is that you simply 
don’t know what’s happening (or what has happened) …so, 
why imagine a worst-case scenario? Why imagine that they 
don’t care about you, or that something horrible has happened? Why do that? Why create these unpleasant stories

51
in your mind? Instead, can you avoid upsetting yourself in 
this way, and learn to be at ease with not knowing? 
So now I’m going to explain how to do standing meditation.

GUIDANCE

STANDING MEDITATION
Standing meditation is not that different from sitting. As 
with sitting meditation, the aim is to be present – to culti -
vate and maintain an easeful quality of presence. 
You’re standing on the Earth... aware of the ground under 
the feet. 
The feet are a little bit apart, so that there is a sense of 
steadiness, a nice firm foundation.
I like to stand with the eyes closed but if you find that it 
makes you feel dizzy you can stand with the eyes open. 
Keep the gaze slightly lowered, so as to avoid being dis -
tracted by what is around you.
The awareness is with the body standing. Place the 
feet about a shoulder width apart, with the weight bal -
anced evenly between the feet, and not tipping forwards
or backwards.

53
Now bring the attention to the legs, moving the awareness 
up the legs to the knees which are kept slightly unlocked – 
not straight or rigid… then up to the hips. 
We allow the shoulders to relax, noticing the weight of 
the arms: objects, very useful objects, dangling from the 
shoulders.
Then notice the neck with the head perched on top, nicely 
balanced. 
Breathe through the muscles of the face – consciously re -
laxing and softening the face. 
Aware of the body breathing...
Aware of the in-breath... 
Aware of the out-breath...
As before, you can use the words, ‘Breathing in... Breathing 
out… ’ or, ‘Here... Now... ’

54
Another phrase which can be helpful, particularly when 
there is a lot of stress is: ‘May I be well… ’ or, ‘May this being 
be well...’
Now please continue to stand in this way, with a sense of 
easeful attentiveness.

55
Kindly Attention
You can see any form of meditation as an opportunity to 
generate kindly attention towards yourself, to wish your -
self well. Often, we’re so hard on ourselves – very critical, 
very harsh. We can give ourselves a really hard time. You 
might think that is being responsible, trying to make your -
self into a better person. But this critical attitude doesn’t 
support any sense of well-being. In fact, it can lead to a 
feeling of stress, or even desperation. 
The Reflection on Universal Well-Being(1) is a helpful guide: 
‘May I abide in well-being,
in freedom from affliction 
in freedom from hostility,
in freedom from ill-will,
in freedom from anxiety.
And may I maintain well-being in myself.’

56
The practice of wishing yourself well is an excellent base 
for generating a happy feeling about yourself and your life.
You may sometimes find yourself being hostile and mean 
in your thoughts about others – especially if you believe 
that you’re right about something, and that they’re wrong. 
However, the harshness in judgements of yourself can be 
even stronger. Of course, you want to be a good person; 
that’s a healthy aspiration. But it’s really important to 
watch how you hold that aspiration – learning to come 
from a place of kindness and self-respect, rather than 
belittling or blaming yourself. It’s particularly impor -
tant to avoid the tendency to be over-critical about your 
practice: ‘I can’t meditate. I’m useless…’ Instead, just cel -
ebrate the fact that you’re on the Path, making that effort.
You can feel glad about that. 
These habits of criticism go very deep, so it’s necessary 
to keep coming back to the present moment supporting

57
yourself with kindly encouragement and the recollection: 
‘May I abide in well-being, in freedom from affliction, hostility, ill 
will and anxiety.’
How can this be applied in everyday life? Firstly, you need 
to take an interest so as to notice this unhelpful habit, 
and learn how to replace it with a more supportive way 
of thinking. Rather than endlessly doubting or criticizing 
yourself, try deliberately thinking: ‘May this being be well.’
Those of you who’ve been to stay with me at Milntuim may 
have seen me preparing for one of our regular meditation 
days. I’m often a bit behind schedule, and you may have 
noticed me using one of my strategies for calming and set -
tling my mind. Rather than saying, ‘Come on, Candasirī! You 
should have done that earlier! Useless! Hopeless!’ , I say gently:  
‘Candasirī, it’s all right, you’re doing the best you can…’  I try to 
talk to myself as I would talk to a dear friend. ‘ You’re doing 
the best you can…’ When you can fully accept yourself and

58
your limitations, you’ll find that you can work out your 
own skilful strategies for managing those difficulties – with 
a sense of calm and friendliness, rather than just reacting 
to them in a harsh or judgemental way.
So, as you practise standing meditation (and at all times) I’d 
really like to encourage you to try to notice your attitude to 
yourself; bring that into awareness.

GUIDANCE

WALKING MEDITATION
When the mind feels very active, it can be helpful to do 
some walking meditation. 
Start by finding a place where you can walk back and 
forth – 15 to 30 paces is a nice stretch. Walking meditation 
is simple, so simple that some people can’t quite believe 
that they’re doing it properly! It’s very simple, but not al -
ways so easy because you are working with the habits of 
a lifetime; particularly those habits of negativity towards 
yourself and others. The practice of walking meditation 
can help you to become aware of those habits. Then it 
is possible to transform them so as to develop a more
positive attitude. 
Begin by bringing awareness to the body standing. 
Come to the breath, gathering the awareness.

60
I usually have my hands clasped in front or behind; this 
can be a physical support for a sense of collectedness. 
You’re fully present. 
Then, when you feel ready, start walking along your cho -
sen path at a normal pace. 
When you get to the end of the path, pause for a moment, 
then turn around, and walk back again to where you start -
ed from.
Stop, pause, turn around, and walk back. 
It’s that simple.
Try to keep the awareness gathered within the body – the 
feet as they touch the ground, or the feeling of the body 
walking. 
As you make effort to practise in this way, you may begin 
to notice an amazing thing about the mind as it wanders:

61
the body can be in one place – and the mind can be some -
where completely different! You can start to appreciate 
the creative capacity of the mind: it can do extraordinary 
things. It can create all kinds of ideas, plans or memories 
or scenarios, just while you’re walking up and down on 
your meditation path. It can become involved with all 
the problems of the world, and work out a myriad of so -
lutions. With the practice of walking meditation you can 
begin to explore the possibility of taking a holiday from 
all that mental activity. When you find yourself begin -
ning to have ‘good ideas’ , you can just stop, and bring the
awareness back to the reality of the body walking, now… 
I like to try to maintain awareness from one end of the 
path to the other, rather than for a longer time. When I 
get to the end of the path I stop, and if the mind has wan -
dered, I once again gather the awareness... feeling the

62
feet on the ground, the air on the skin. Then I turn and, 
having resolved to maintain awareness for the walk back 
to the other end of the path, I begin walking. Gradually, the 
awareness gathers into something more continuous.  
Time may seem to pass incredibly slowly, but that’s OK – 
just keep going… 
At worst, it’s harmless. Walking meditation is not going to 
harm anyone – and you’re not going to hurt yourself… Or 
you may find that the time goes by very quickly.
Use this opportunity to cultivate presence. You can also 
cultivate an attitude of kindliness or, if that seems impos -
sible, at least notice any un-kindness. Bring the awareness 
into the body, then when you notice unkind thoughts aris -
ing you can just decide: ‘I’m not going to think like that. ’  
and just carry on walking, celebrating this opportunity.

63
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q: Could you say something about the relationship be -
tween contentment and right effort?  
A: Our practice is very much about seeing things as they 
are; it’s also about observation, about knowing oneself, 
knowing one’s character and habitual tendencies. Some of 
us are over critical: too hard on ourselves. But we can also 
sometimes be too soft on ourselves. As you begin to notice 
the results of your practice, you may realize that you need 
to adjust. Sometimes the sense of relaxed contentment can 
turn into a kind of complacency. At other times we may 
feel very frustrated and upset, and find ourselves running 
around in circles – not getting anywhere, and generally 
feeling discouraged about our practice. To find a balance 
takes vigilance.

64
Try to establish a basis of care, calm and presence from 
which to respond to the different situations of your life. 
Remember that there’s an important distinction between 
a ‘response’ and a ‘reaction’. I find that ‘reacting’ usually 
comes from a place of aversion or desire – whereas if, first 
of all, I establish mindfulness, I am more able to observe to 
the situation carefully and to respond appropriately.
So keep sharpening the awareness! There is a word in Pali, 
pañña, which means wisdom. It also refers to a quality of 
discernment, being able to recognize whether something 
is helpful or not helpful. Keep noticing the results of your 
practice. Is there a sense of well-being and happiness? Is 
there a sense of brightness in the mind? A sense of energy? 
A sense of willingness, a sense of goodwill, both to yourself 
and to others – or are you grumpy and irritated with everything and everybody? We need to notice the results of our 
practice so as to adjust accordingly.
•  •  •

65
Q: What if somebody says: ‘I can’t manage. I need to take 
something to help me cope.’ Should we try to make ourselves 
happy naturally, or is it OK to use medication to help to 
brighten the mood?
A: There has been quite a bit of research done on the use of 
mindfulness techniques for working with depression. It has 
been found that mindfulness meditation (which is what we 
are doing here) can bring about a significant improvement 
for some people who have recurrent depressive episodes. 
It works by helping them to be aware of what is happening 
at the start of a depressive episode so that they can take 
certain steps to support themselves through it – without 
going down too deep. However, there are also situations 
where having a little bit of a boost with prescribed medica -
tion can be very helpful in maintaining a reasonable level 
of well-being, and preventing a further dipping down.

66
It is important to recognize that sometimes we need help, 
and to see that asking for it needn’t be seen as an admission 
of failure. Sometimes I really need help in the Hermitage; 
but then, when somebody offers, I often say, ‘ It’s OK, I’m 
managing fine...’  But then, when I look around me, I think, 
‘Actually, a little help would be very nice…’  I’m still training 
myself to see that acknowledging that a bit of help would 
be appreciated is a kind of wisdom. It’s not a failure.
So if you are prescribed some kind of medication – whether 
for a physical ailment or for some kind of mental problem – 
it’s good to take it. Mostly, people prescribe these things to 
support us in feeling more balanced, and sometimes that’s 
necessary. If, over time, you find that the medication is not 
bringing a good result, then you can discuss it with the person who suggested you take it.  
I find it helpful to recognize that there is such a thing as 
sickness of the mind – just as there can be bodily injury

67
or disease – and sometimes medicine is needed to support 
coming into balance, and healing. 
•  •  •
Q: Could you say something about the mind and the physical state? Sometimes I think I’m softening and relaxing but 
then something comes up and, suddenly, I feel really upset.
A: It is a very good question because the mind and the 
body are very closely connected. If we are worried and 
upset about something, we may not sleep so well. If we 
are frightened, the body has a kind of ‘revved up’ feeling. 
Relaxing the body can help the mind to settle, and some -
times settling the mind can help the body to settle...
There is a practice I speak about that some people call ‘ Soft 
Face Practice’; it’s simply relaxing and softening the face. If, 
in meditation, you notice that there is a lot of thinking, try 
observing what’s happening to the face. One of the things

68
I’ve noticed is that the forehead tenses up, and something 
seems to happen around the eyes. It’s almost as though I’m 
physically scrutinizing the thoughts. Then, rather than 
trying to make the thinking stop, I simply focus on relax -
ing the face. When I do that, the thoughts become less of a 
problem – in fact, usually they disappear altogether.
If they don’t, you can also try studying what it feels like to 
be thinking: ‘ OK. This is thinking. This is what thinking feels 
like...’ Just notice; just observe how the mental activity af -
fects you physically – and again, relax: the face, the shoul -
ders, everywhere. 
•  •  •
Q: Are there any practical solutions to achieving a sense of 
calm and relaxation when facing extreme demands, when 
you are in a very active environment?
A: This can be very challenging, so you need to use what -
ever strategy you can immediately access to establis h

69
mindfulness. For example, notice: are you breathing? If 
your toddler is screaming, notice that you are still breath -
ing. You can’t stop breathing just because your toddler is 
screaming... So try to be with the breath. Try to be with the 
body, relax the body. 
We tend, habitually, to go up to the brain when we are 
stressed. That is a common default strategy. You go up into 
the head, and try to ‘think’ your way out of a difficult situation, or to drive away feelings of irritation, anger or upset. 
Or else you tumble into resentful thinking: ‘It’s all because 
of him, or her…’ The mind tends to create whole stories that 
are often not related to anything real, that create more 
stress and are generally unhelpful. It’s an understandable 
response but not the best, wisest way of dealing with such 
situations – as you’ve probably discovered!  
Focusing on the breath can help. I find the out-breath is 
very interesting; not the exasperated out-breath but the

70
long, easy exhalation. This can be a reminder and a sup -
port for letting go, just putting things down as you breathe 
out slowly and evenly. You can feel your face, your arms –
everything – softening and relaxing. It’s the opposite of 
what the body does naturally. Normally, when the body/
mind is stressed, it tenses up; but you can train yourself 
to use the out-breath for letting go, breathing through the 
whole body and down into the Earth.  
 …So find a way to soothe yourself, as you would soothe a 
child who is upset. If you learn how to soothe yourself like 
this, it can break that circuit of everyone’s upset: ‘I’m upset 
because you’re upset, etc…’
By taking those lovely long out-breaths, you are establish -
ing your refuge in Dhamma. When we are frightened by 
a person or situation, it can result in a very unfortunate 
reaction, so the more that we can establish presence, the 
better. That is where the Truth is, where the refuge of

71
Dhamma is to be found. Being fully with the breath is to 
take refuge in Dhamma.
•  •  •
Q: How long do you meditate each day, and when do you 
begin to see results?
A: In our monastic community, we usually practise formal 
meditation together for an hour in the morning and an 
hour in the evening… but we also try to make our whole 
life a meditation. 
Now please don’t upset yourself, by thinking: ‘ Oh goodness! 
I’ve got to meditate all the time!’ Instead, see your life as an opportunity – an opportunity to be aware. Think of it as your 
birthright: to be aware, to know what’s going on. 
If you are interested in establishing a daily practice of for -
mal meditation I would suggest that you sit down at least 
once a day, and for at least ten minutes. Find a time and a

72
place where you’re not going to be interrupted, somewhere 
you can just sit quietly and focus; using the time to be as 
fully present as you can, in a relaxed and friendly way.
Try not to concern yourself too much with the results of 
your practice. In fact, it may be someone else who notices 
that you have changed before you see any result yourself. 
We’re practising to be present, not looking for results in 
the future – even though they’ll surely come…
•  •  •
Q: Sometimes my son says to me, ‘ Mum, I don’t want to do 
anything!’ Maybe he’s helping me to understand that some -
times we don’t need to DO anything, we can just be…
A: Yes. Sometimes we can learn a lot from children. For 
example, you can take time to be with nature, just being 
quiet – taking time just to be with yourself. You can take 
time to read your own mind, in a gentle and kindly way…

73
and that’s not being selfish. It’s actually taking care of our -
selves so as to maintain a sense of well-being – as a resource
for everyone.
•  •  •
Q: How can you deal with people who can get very upset 
and just keep talking on and on about their concerns? Do 
you have to keep listening if what the other person is say -
ing is not wise, compassionate or helpful in any way?
A: When you can establish a sense of ease within yourself, 
you can be with others in a clear and kind way – and you 
won’t need to squash down feelings of frustration, irrita -
tion or anger. It is possible to be honest about how you feel, 
and even to communicate that directly, in a way that does 
not cause harm to the other person or to your relationship. 
Sometimes, the kindest thing is simply to stop the conver -
sation. This might sound uncompassionate, but it’s actually

74
the kindest thing you can do, because some people are al -
most addicted to talking. They talk and talk and talk – and 
usually it’s not particularly helpful for anyone.  
I’ve found too that setting a mental time limit for such 
conversations is often helpful. You could see it as taking 
care of your own needs, as well as appreciating the other 
person’s situation. 
I think this may be more of a problem for women than 
for men, because sometimes we seem to feel that we have 
to keep on attending to the needs of others until we col -
lapse… Some people might even think that looking after 
their own needs is selfish; however, I see that now as being 
responsible. It’s appropriate to take responsibility for one’s 
well-being. No one is obliged to give anyone unlimited at -
tention; it’s quite OK to set a limit. Sometimes I even say 
something like: ‘You’ve been speaking for half an hour, and now 
I’m finding it difficult to focus on what you are saying, because

75
I’m a bit  tired.’ That can be a very helpful, and kind, action; 
it’s a way of offering honest feedback.
Please try to avoid falling into a state of resentment, or even 
hatred, towards the other person; it is much more benefi -
cial just to acknowledge the limitations of the situation. 
When you act from a place of clarity and kindness, you can 
be honest in a way that does not undermine your own, or 
the other person’s sense of well-being. By being honest 
about your own needs, you help the other person to de -
velop consideration for others and to better understand 
their own needs.
•  •  •
Q: How can you deal with someone else’s actions which 
may have hurt you or caused offence – in particular, when 
it happens within a family?
A: Again, if you are able to view a situation from a place of 
clarity and calm, it is easier to assess whether it m ight be

76
possible, or helpful, to intervene. Sometimes just accepting 
how things are is the most skilful option. However, there 
are also times when concerns really need to be addressed 
and, rather than feeling helpless or impotent, you have to 
find a way to deal with the situation. You also need to be 
aware of your intention, as far as possible.
Interestingly, when you can reach a place of acceptance, 
rather than continuing to react with inner fear or judge -
ment, you’ll find that you see things more clearly – and 
can more easily discern the best way forward. You may 
have a sense of whether it will be more beneficial to talk to 
one person, or to talk to a group – of what will lead to the 
most fruitful conversation. If you can speak from a place 
of acceptance and inner quiet, you’ll find that people can 
listen calmly, and what you say has a chance of being heard 
and understood.
The Buddha established certain conditions that I find

77
helpful to consider. One is to create the right kind of situ -
ation. This takes care and consideration, especially if it’s 
a serious matter. You need to make sure that the condi -
tions are as supportive as possible for everyone involved. 
For example, ensure that you’re not going to be disturbed 
or interrupted, and that you allow enough time for a suit -
able discussion. Secondly, try to approach the situation in 
a calm, even way – not filled with anger or fear, but with 
a sense of concern for the well-being of the other person 
or group; you try to speak from a place of kindness, with 
the intention to support. Thirdly, speak about what is hap -
pening, or has happened; avoid making assumptions about 
what somebody might have been thinking, or any intention 
they may have had. This means that you speak only from 
your own observation, using terms like ‘ I notice…; what I no -
tice, what I’ve heard, what I’ve seen.. .’, and so on; you speak of 
facts, not suppositions. Fourthly, speak gently, don’t shout

78
or speak harshly, using bad language. Finally, speak clearly 
and directly. (A.10: 78) (2) Remember that the intention is 
to help, not to add to the pain of the situation but to bring 
clarity to it. Respond with intelligence and compassion.
I’ve found that when I take care of these things, the person 
or the people being addressed are usually able to hear and 
understand what I’m trying to convey.
Of course, it takes courage. Many people find it challenging 
to address difficult issues but, in community and in rela -
tionships, it’s sometimes necessary. Over the years, I’ve 
discovered that it is invariably beneficial – if I can just take 
that difficult first step.
The alternative is not very attractive; it can simply lead to 
a build-up of frustration. Once I was co-leading a retreat 
and, quite early on, I began to feel upset by the way it was 
going. Over the hours this feeling of upset was escalating

79
and I was aware that I was becoming more and more an -
gry – to the point where I became concerned that I might 
do or say something inappropriate, in front of a hundred 
retreatants! Fortunately, in the end, I remembered a 
technique I had learned from Marshall Rosenberg’s NonViolent Communication (3) that enabled me to consider 
what was happening in a different way. Instead of focusing 
on the anger and trying to control it, I looked deeper – at 
what was triggering those feelings of rage. I also consid -
ered what might have been motivating the other person. 
Immediately everything calmed down; the rage gave way 
to compassion – for myself, and for the other person. The 
next day, I was able to have the conversation that was 
needed, and the situation was resolved.
It’s good to remember that the other person may be com -
pletely unaware of the effect that they are having on you. 
You may assume that they know; you may even think that

80
they are doing it deliberately – but in fact, they may be 
completely unaware of how you are affected, and definitely 
wouldn’t want to cause any hurt or irritation. 
It can also be helpful to find someone to talk with, if you 
do feel trapped by a particular situation; not in a gossipy 
way but more as a support for understanding. Speaking 
with a good friend ( kalyānamitta) can help us to appreciate 
how we may be contributing to the situation, and to find 
a way of working together to resolve the difficulty. Then 
it can become rather exciting! It becomes good fun, like a 
game – rather than a ghastly ordeal with endless problems
and obstacles.
•  •  •
Q: What can you do when faced with people behaving in 
an irresponsible or anti-social manner, that disturbs the 
people around them? I find that it’s very hard to know

81
what’s best: whether to complain to the people concerned 
directly, or to write them a letter, or to send in a complaint 
to the authorities.
A: What I understand from your question is that there is 
some fear, and concern. Maybe it’s good to start at that 
point: to take time to notice how you are feeling – then you 
can consider what strategy might be most suitable. 
Remember that your intention is to support the other 
people around you. However, you also want to encourage 
those concerned to behave in an appropriate way, so that 
everyone can live harmoniously together.  
Even the Buddha had to deal with all kinds of challeng -
ing situations. One time, when he was asked about giving 
people truthful feedback – he pointed out that sometimes 
you have to be quite clear and firm; even if you know that

82
someone is not going to like what you have to say. He said 
that if what you intend to say is true and beneficial, and you 
say it with the intention to support – then, finding a suit -
able time, you should say, do or write whatever is needed. 
In a situation like that, it’s important to have compassion 
for yourself, as well as everyone involved. Occasionally, it 
may be necessary to resort to a more formal procedure of 
complaint, but if you can maintain an attitude of kindness 
and compassion, it is most likely that the result will be beneficial for all. You, certainly, will feel happier – knowing 
that you have done your best.
•  •  •

83
Generosity, Contentment and Gratitude
I have always been struck by the way in which the Buddha 
established what is known as the Four-Fold Assembly: the 
monks, nuns, lay women and lay men – and the fact that 
it relies totally on kindness, generosity and cooperation. 
Each person has the opportunity to support by offering 
something of benefit, and to experience the happiness that 
can arise from such skilful action.
There’s a wonderful passage in the scriptures, where a lay -
woman named Visakha has asked the Buddha if she may 
provide significant support to the monks and nuns. The 
Buddha then asked her what benefit she sees for herself in 
making this gesture, and her response is:
 ‘W hen I remember it, I shall be glad.
When I am glad, I shall feel delight.
When my mind is delighted, my body will feel settled.

84
When my body feels settled, I shall be at ease.
When I feel at ease, my mind will be composed – and that will 
maintain the Spiritual Faculties in being in me, and also the 
Spiritual Powers, and the Enlightenment Factors.  ’  
(VIN. MV. 8) 4
Generosity, or dāna is said to be one of the highest blessings. 
It can manifest in many different ways: as sharing what we 
have, as the offering of money or material items; offering 
our time and practical skills; offering our attention, care 
or interest; or simply the willingness to give someone the 
benefit of the doubt. 
It’s important to stay in touch, to be mindful of the state of 
mind, when making such an offering. Offerings made from 
a full and willing heart bring joy; however, if it comes from 
any sense of pressure or obligation, the heart may turn 
sour and resentful.

85
In my own  practice, I have found that being able to offer 
something brings about a state of contentment – a sense 
of having enough. Sometimes when I am on retreat, I share 
a small portion of the almsfood I have received that day 
with the creatures that live close by. This always brings 
joy. Even if there is not very much food, when I do this, it 
always feels like enough. There are even traditions where 
this practice is spoken of as feeding the hungry ghosts!
In one verse in the Dhammapada the Buddha speaks of contentment as being the greatest wealth. Sadly, there is very 
little in present day society to encourage contentment. 
Most advertising is devised specifically to undermine it, 
and to generate desire for more. It can take a real determi -
nation to consider that what we have is good enough. In the 
monastery we consider what we need as basic requisites 
for survival: robes, almsfood, shelter and medicine. I think 
this reflection can be helpful for everybody; with a bit of 
ingenuity, you can adapt it to your own circums tances.

86
Such a contemplation also leads to a sense of grati -
tude. Feeling content, having enough, we feel grate -
ful; when someone treats us kindly, we feel grateful; 
when things work out well, we can feel grateful; even 
when they don’t, we can feel grateful for the opportu -
nity to learn something new. Practising like this, there is
a natural sense of happiness…
Sharing Blessings
Alongside the offering of time, energy, skills or material 
gifts, there is another practice that may be unfamiliar to 
some of you. It may even seem alien to those whose con -
ditioning has been in the direction of playing down one’s 
achievements (for fear of pride or bolstering the ego!). 
This is the intention to recognize and share the blessings 
of our life and practice with others. It’s a practice that 
we see frequently in our monasteries, when bereaved

87
families come to offer a meal they have prepared to hon -
our the memory of a deceased relative. There is always 
a dedication of the ‘merits’ or blessings for their welfare 
– a kind of wishing them well on their way. Although 
it is often a sad occasion, there is an element of joy that 
comes through thinking kindly of their loved one, and 
working together to offer something for their welfare.
Everybody is uplifted by such a gesture.
In the case of practice on a retreat, it’s clear that usually 
our efforts are made primarily for our own benefit, our own 
personal well-being. However, any blessing arising from 
this practice is shared, naturally – whether we intend it or 
not. As we become more peaceful, more at ease and loving, 
those around us are affected in a positive way; they tend 
to feel a sense of ease around us. There is also a practice 
that is a more conscious dedication of our practice, of the 
goodness of our life. It is sometimes referred to as ‘ Sharing

88
(or ‘Dedication’) of Merit’. It involves bringing different be -
ings to mind, with the intention to dedicate any benefits or 
blessings arising from our practice for their welfare.
At the end of a time of practice together, I like to encour -
age everyone to bring to mind the conditions that have 
enabled them to participate. I see this as an opportunity 
to share the blessings of such time together. It doesn’t 
matter whether it was a deep and insightful meditation, or 
felt like a complete waste of time, you simply share what -
ever blessings have been generated without any concerns 
about the quality, or whether there is enough blessing to 
share with everyone! The willingness to share is, in itself,
another blessing… 
Even if you end up feeling discouraged about your practice 
– perhaps there has been thinking, or sleepiness – by persevering and continuing to work with those conditions, you 
will have developed a lot of patience. The Buddha pointed

89
out that patience is the supreme austerity; everyone needs 
to be very patient with the challenging conditions that are 
inevitably encountered along the Way. So you could have 
generated a great many more blessings than you realize!
We’ll sit quietly now…

GUIDANCE

MEDITATION ON SHARING 
BLESSINGS
Please take time to find a comfortable posture, sit nice and 
straight with the head held up. Gently close the eyes, and 
tune into a sense of bodily ease and well-being, letting go 
of any tension or feelings of stress.
Bring your attention to the breath, and take time to relax 
and settle the body.
Now bring awareness to the heart, the heart centre.
Imagine a warm light, like the flame of a candle, in your 
heart centre. 
As you breathe in, imagine this light growing brighter; with 
the out-breath, feel it radiating throughout the whole of 
your being – gradually extending outwards to fill the space 
around you. This generous, kind, light energy touches and

91
envelops each of the beings sharing this space, infusing 
them with a sense of deep well-being and ease.
Now you can bring to mind others and surround them also 
with this light, bathing them all in the blessings that are 
being generated. 
It’s usual to begin with our teachers. Take time to bring to 
mind all the beings who have guided you towards what is 
wholesome, what is good.
It could be a school teacher, or friend, a relative, or a reli -
gious person: a monk or a nun.
Bring to mind all of those beings who have encouraged 
and guided you in your lives; those who have been an ex -
ample for you. 
Share the blessings of your life with them, dedicating your 
practice for their welfare.

92
It doesn’t matter whether they are alive or no longer alive; 
remember their kindness towards you.
For myself, I like to think of the teachers I had before 
I found the Buddhist Path, as well as Ajahn Chah and
Ajahn Sumedho.
It could be one person, half a dozen, or maybe many 
people. Visualize them, or name them – whatever feels 
meaningful for you. Imagine them receiving the blessings 
of your practice. Surround them with this beautiful
light of blessing. 
May they be well, may they be liberated from every kind 
of suffering.
Now bring to mind your parents – whether they were foolish 
and selfish, or good, kind and wise – remember that they 
have given you this human birth, with the opportunity to 
investigate suffering and its causes, and to experience the 
happiness of liberation.

93
So, out of gratitude, there is the wish that each of your parents may be liberated from suffering and experience peace 
and well-being, wherever they may be…
Bring to mind the people you grew up with, your siblings, 
your good friends.
If you notice that there is any resentment or negativity to -
wards anyone, see this as an opportunity to let that go…
May they share in the blessings of your life.
May they experience inner ease and happiness…
Now take time to consider powerful, privileged and im -
mensely wealthy people: the kings and queens, politi -
cians, presidents and prime ministers, the billionaires.
These people may seem to have extraordinary privilege. 
But, in a sense, they also have great responsibility; they 
can use their position to do great good in the world, or 
great harm. As I see it, they need all the help they can get

94
– every possible blessing and kindness to support inner 
balance, freedom from fear, wisdom and compassion so 
that they can discern how to use their influence and re -
sources in a way that benefits everybody. 
May they be well…
May they share in the blessing of your life and find deep 
ease of being… 
Next, bring to mind the people that you normally associ -
ate with; those who are living in ordinary circumstances, 
nothing extreme.
Colleagues, friends, relatives – we share blessings with 
them: may they also experience inner balance, well-being 
and happiness in their lives.
Now bring to mind anybody that you know who is sick, 
or experiencing some kind of difficulty – financial or do -
mestic problems; mental tumult, fear or agitation, or any 
stressful or painful situation.

95
Visualize them, name them; share the blessings of your 
practice with them.
May they find inner balance, calm and happiness in their 
lives…
Now, bring to mind beings that you don’t know but have 
heard about through the media – those who are living in 
extremely challenging situations. 
People living in situations of conflict; those who are in 
prison.
People living in extreme poverty, struggling with unbear -
able losses, or in states of confusion or fear.
May these people also share the blessings of your life.
May their sufferings be eased; their hearts steadied.
Now, consider the animal kingdom: wild animals, domes -
tic animals, animals of the land, the oceans, the air; big 
ones, medium-sized and tiny ones.

96
May they also flourish, may they be well…
We extend these blessings over the entire planet; across 
the continents, reaching to the tops of the highest moun -
tains and down to the depths of the oceans…
Enfolding the plants, the earth, the atmosphere and ex -
tending out into the farthest reaches of the universe, the 
vastness of space.
May all beings everywhere abide in well-being.
Finally, bring the awareness back to your own body. 
Just be here – with the intention: 
‘May this being be well. 
May she (or he) feel glad at the good that has been done. 
May this being be happy, liberated from every kind of 
suffering.’

98
FINAL WORD
I wish you great happiness and joy in your lives.
Please make it a part of your practice to spend time with 
like-minded friends and to go to special spiritual places 
whenever you can.
Try to have a daily practice, at least ten minutes, of sitting 
quietly with yourself – and always with a kind and friendly 
attitude.
Be vigilant, be patient with yourself and also with others. 
Don’t let hatred or aversion or irritation lodge in your 
heart. They really undermine any sense of well-being and 
happiness…
Above all, notice beauty in your life: a kind word, a 
warm smile, rain on the surface of a puddle, the sound of

99
birdsong, the fragrance of the earth after a shower of rain. 
Fill your heart with beauty – as much as you can – so that 
there is an ample supply that can be freely and unself -
consciously shared, to make the world a more beautiful
and happier abiding place for all beings.

About the Author
Sister Ajahn Candasir ī was born in Edinburgh, Scotland 
in 1947. In 1979 she entered monastic life as one of the 
first four women to be ordained as anag ārikās by Ajahn 
Sumedho at Chithurst Forest Monastery in West Sussex. 
In 1983 she went forth as a Ten Precept Nun (sīladhar ā). 
Since then, she has lived at either Chithurst or Amaravati 
monasteries and has been active in establishing a monastic 
training for women. Now she lives in Scotland at Milntuim 
Hermitage, a small monastery for nuns of the Forest
Sangha tradition.

Endnotes
(1) Reflection on Universal Well-Being. Chanting Book, 
Volume 1 (Amaravati Publications 2015).
(2) This passage from the Anguttara Nikāya: Book of Tens, 
section 78 is taken from The Pātimokkha – Translated 
from the Pali by Ven Ñā namoli Thera (Published for Maha 
Makut Academy by the Social Science Association Press of 
Thailand, Bangkok 1966).
(3) Non-Violent Communication - A language of Compassion (PuddleDancer Press puddledancer.com ©1999 
Marshall Rosenberg PhD.).
(4) Adapted from p. 155 ‘The Life of the Buddha’ by Bhikkhu 
Ñānamoli (Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy, Sri Lanka).

The Secret of Happiness
AJAHN CANDASIRĪ
2021 © AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS
AMARAVATI BUDDHIST MONASTERY
ST MARGARETS
GREAT GADDESDEN
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD
HERTFORDSHIRE HP1 3BZ
ISBN: 978-1-78432-184-0
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT , TRANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN
ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA PLEASE CONTACT AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS AT
PUBLICATIONS@AMARAVATI.ORG
IF YOU WISH TO TRANSLATE THIS TEXT IT MUST BE TAKEN FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE EBOOK AT FSBOOKS.ORG
COVER AND TEXT DESIGN AND FORMATTING: NICHOLAS HALLIDAY . HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
 
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT
HTTP://CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND/4.0/

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the
license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material
in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as
publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.