# Chapter 7

381
Chapter 7
1 . Page 69 – just like the god Krishna’s own mother – Lord Krishna’s 
mother was named Devaki, his father was Vasudeva.
2 . Page 69 – Lord Krishna and the buttermilk – This story of the young 
Lord Krishna’s mischief is to be found in the Bhagavata Purana, Skanda 10.
3 . Page 71 – the travellers from Kalinga – Kalinga was an ancient kingdom 
on the eastern shores of India. It was located where the states of Orissa and 
Andhra Pradesh are to be found today.
Chapter 8
1 . Page 76 – Kuvera … the Heavenly King who was the Guardian of the 
North and ruler of the yakkhas – Each of the four directions has its celestial 
guardian or Lokapala, each of whom is the ruler of a certain class of beings: 
East is Dhatarattha, king of the gandhabbas (gandharvas in Skt), the heavenly 
musicians; South is Virulhaka, king of the kumbhandas, pot-bellied gnomes 
and petas (hungry ghosts); West is Virupakkha, king of the nagas, the divine 
dragons; North is Kuvera, also known as Vessavana, who is king of the 
yakkhas, the celestial demons. These are all listed in the Atanatiya Paritta, 
employed so effectively by the kinnari in Ch 4. A description of these Four 
Great Kings, and their subjects is found in the Atanatiya Sutta, D 32.
2 . Page 76 – a monk had come to their gate seeking for alms – Buddhist 
monastics in Thailand and Burma still make a daily alms round. The ‘houseto-house’ style of gathering alms, where the monk or nun stands by the door 
of each house for a while, is still found in India among certain groups of yogis 
and sanyasins . 
3 . Page 77 – monks could be very difficult about needing to sit higher up 
– The Buddhist monastic training rules, Sekhiyas #68 and #69, refer to this. A 
nun or monk should always sit higher if giving teachings; if it’s an ordinary 
encounter, however, the relative heights don’t matter.
4 . Pages 78 – Mysterioso, Impervioso, … Greensickness Peak, … in 
the Great Fable Mountains – These are all references to characters and 
locations in The Story of the Stone, also known as The Dream of the Red Chamber 
by Cao Xueqin (Tsao Shue-Chin). The definitive English translation of this 
great Chinese tale was made by David Hawkes, published by Penguin Classics 
in five volumes.
5 . Page 79 – It is difficult to evade the King of Death – Many teachings 
in the scriptures refer to this, e.g. at S 35.248. Here the Buddha describes 
the captured asura king Vepacitti, after losing a battle with the devas, 
being bound ‘by his four limbs and neck’, his bonds became stonger with 
his violence and self-righteousness, and milder with his humility and 
acquiescence. The Buddha then goes on to say: ‘So subtle, monks, was the 
bondage of Vepacitti, but even subtler than that is the bondage of Māra.’
6 . Page 80 – he mixes the nectar of the kola fruit – This fruit has indeed 
been used for varieties of food and drink since the time of the Buddha, for 
example at M 12.52: ‘Sāriputta, there are certain recluses and brahmins 
whose doctrine and view is this: “Purification comes about through food.” 
They say: “Let us live on kola-fruits”, and they eat kola-fruits, they eat kolafruit powder, they drink kola-fruit water, and they make many kinds of kolafruit concoctions.’
Chapter 9
 1 . Page 83 – Mango isn’t really a very suitable name, is it? – ‘Mango’ is, 
as mentioned above, the English translation of ‘Amba’. The most famous 
character in Buddhist myth and scripture with a ‘mango’ name was Ambapali, 
the great courtesan of Vesali. Once when she had invited the Buddha and his 
monks to a meal at her house and he had accepted, she refused 100,000 gold 
pieces subsequently offered by the Licchavi princes to give up the invitation: 
‘They snapped their fingers saying: “We’ve been beaten by the mango-girl, 
we’ve been outwitted by the mango-girl.”’ This story is recounted in ‘The 
Discourse on the Buddha’s Last Days’, D 16.2.16. Later she became a nun and 
a famous Arahant; her verses of enlightenment are recorded at Thig 13.1
2 . Page 85 – a large group of ascetic wanderers, … came and stayed  – 
This part of the tale also comes directly from The Story Cycle of King Udena, 
in the Dhammapada Commentary to verses 21-3; see Buddhist Legends Vol I, 
pp 277-80.
3 . Page 89 – acts of faith … bring … well-being and happiness for a long 
time – This principle is described by the Buddha in many places in the 
scriptures, for example, in ‘The Discourse on the Exposition of Offerings’ at 
M 142, and also at D 16.5.11: ‘A stupa should be erected for the Tathagata. 
And whoever lays wreaths or puts sweet perfumes and colours there with a 
devout heart will reap benefit and happiness for a long time.’
 4 . Page 89 – useful items for the Buddha and his Sangha – The word 
‘Sangha’ means the community of those who practise the Buddha’s Way. 
More specifically, those who have formally committed themselves to the 
lifestyle of mendicant monks and nuns. It also includes those who are on the 
path to or who have realized the fruition of the four stages of enlightenment: 
stream-entry, once return, non-return, and arahantship.
5 . Page 90 – He was going to donate the park where the wanderers had 
been staying – As it turned out, the Ghositarama was the only monastery 
ever established within the walls of a city during the Buddha’s lifetime. The 
foundations of the old monastery compound and the pillar planted there by 
the Emperor Ashoka can still be seen at the site of ancient Kosambi to this day.
6 . Page 91 – the Buddha stood still and straight and recited a blessing – 
Even in the Buddha’s time this kind of anumodana (literally, ‘rejoicing in the 
good that has been done’) was given, e.g. at M 91.17.
7 . Page 92 – the paths and forests of Jambudipa – ‘Jambudipa’ is an ancient 
name for India. It literally means ‘the island of rose apples’. 
8 . Page 92 – the stuff they melt out of trees and make waterproof things 
with – In Thailand in former times, the sap of the my yahng tree was used 
in this way to make waterproof vessels from basketwork, and to fix axehandles, knife-blades etc. in their handles.
Chapter 10
1 . Page 100 – there was a man called Kotuhalaka – This part of the story, 
Ghosaka’s karmic history, also comes directly from The Story Cycle of King 
Udena in the Dhammapada Commentary to verses 21-3; see Buddhist Legends 
Vol I, pp 252-66. ‘Kotuhalaka’ means ‘excited’ or ‘earnest’, ‘Kali’ means ‘black’ 
or ‘the Dark One’ and ‘Kapi’ means ‘monkey’.
2. Pages 103-104 – no teacher’s closed fist for the initiated – This principle 
is described in several places in the scriptures, for example: ‘I have taught 
the Dhamma, Ananda, making no “inner” and “outer”; the Tathagata has no 
“teacher’s closed fist” in respect to doctrines,’ at D 16.2.25; and: ‘Bhikkhus … I 
am ever accessible to entreaties, open-handed (payatapani)’, at Iti 100 .
3 . Page 104 – trying to persuade folk to visit their temples or to 
follow their beliefs – There is indeed a long-standing tradition of nonproselytization in Buddhist practice; however, there is no explicit rule 
prohibiting it. This tradition most obviously manifests itself in the custom of 
formally inviting the teachings to be given, even at standard weekly events 
in a monastery; also in the style of the alms-round, wherein the monastics 
may make themselves available for offerings but may not ask or even hint 
that they would like something.
4 . Page 104 – made one want to ‘come and see’ – Ehipassiko means 
‘encouraging investigation’, ‘inviting one to come and see’. It is one of the 
classic attributes of the Dhamma.
5 . Page 104 – they would present them to one of the attendant bhikkhus 
– This monk would then have the responsibility of informing the ‘stores 
monk’, who would then see that all offerings were properly taken care 
of and put away. In due course they would be shared out as needed to all 
community members.
6 . Page 104 – to sit on a raised bench – A Dhammasana or Dhamma-seat. So 
positioned that the speaker of Dhamma can be seen and heard easily and so 
is sitting higher than the rest of the assembly.
7 . Page 105 – facing the east – The direction of dawn; even today Dhamma 
Halls are usually arranged so the Buddha-rupa is facing east.
8 . Page 105 – similes from kitchen and cattle-pen, from battleground and 
bath-time – For example: 
kitchen  – water drops on a hot plate – M 66.16
cattle-pen – care for the cows – M 33.2-14
battle-ground – M 63.5
bath-time – kneading bath powder – M 39.15
9 . Page 105 – everything in life, it seemed, could be used to learn from – 
This was a favourite dictum of Ven. Ajahn Chah. See for example Everything is 
Teaching Us, trans. by Paul Breiter.
10 . Page 105 – Just as  when rain pours down in thick droplets – This 
teaching is from S 55.38; the translation here is based on that of Ven. Bhikkhu 
Bodhi. The same simile is used in S 12.23, the Upanisa Sutta.
11 . Page 105 – it is in accordance with nature – This is an edited version 
of A 10.2.
12 . Page 106 – her confidence in his wisdom and purity of heart became 
unshakeable – In Buddhist tradition this quality of spiritual certainty is 
known as stream-entry. It is characterized by the arising of perfect faith in

382
a) the Buddha (= the qualities of wisdom and awareness), b) the Dharma (= 
the Buddha’s teaching and the Truth of the way nature is), and c) the Sangha 
(= the community of those who have awakened to the Truth and the quality 
of unselfishness that they embody); as well as d) a natural and complete 
honesty. One who has entered the Stream in this way is said to be guaranteed 
to reach full enlightenment (arahantship) in no more than seven lifetimes; 
furthermore, it is said that during that time it is impossible for such a one to 
be born in any of the lower realms – that of the animals, the hungry ghosts 
or in the hells (see Ch 4, note 1) .
13 . Page 106 – totally present … totally transparent – This mysterious 
blend of qualities is represented in the word that the Buddha coined to refer 
to himself: ‘Tathagata’ – it means both ‘thus come’ and ‘thus gone’ or ‘gone 
to suchness’ and ‘come to suchness’.
Chapter 11
1 . Page 112 – us earth-spirits are somewhat nudged into the background 
– This situation is described by a young female devata when telling the 
bhikkhu Samiddhi how hard it is for junior characters like her to see the 
Buddha: ‘It isn’t easy for us to approach that Blessed One, bhikkhu, as he is 
surrounded by other devatas of great influence.’ The monk, however, kindly 
arranges a chance for her to meet the Buddha face to face. The encounter is 
described at S 1.20.
2 . Page 112 – time is different … so too is space – At the time of his final 
passing away, the Buddha asked the monk who was fanning him, Upavana, 
to stand aside since: ‘The devas from ten world-spheres have gathered to 
see the Tathagata … For a distance of 12 yojanas [= 108 miles] … there is not a 
space you could touch with the point of a hair that is not filled with mighty 
devas.’ D 16.5.4-6.
3 . Page 112 – the Udambara flower – This rarest of blossoms is mentioned 
in the Lotus Sutra; it flowers only once every three thousand years. There is 
also a legend in Vietnam that the fragrance remains after the flowers have 
fallen:
‘And those people who hear this Dharma –
Such people too, are rare,
Like the Udambara flower,
In which all take delight, 
Which the gods and humans prize,
For it blooms but once in a long long time.’
Lotus Sutra, Ch 2, ‘Expedient Devices’.
4 . Page 114 – park-devas, grove-devas, medicinal herb-pixies, the 
dwellers in forest giants – In Pali these are arama-devata, vana-devata, 
osadhitina-vanaspatisu and adhivattha-devata. Such beings are mentioned, for 
example at S 41.10.
5 . Page 114 – the Buddha would be departing on his annual wanderings – 
It was customary for the Buddha (and the custom is still followed by dhutanga 
monks in Thailand) to reside for the Rains at one place, and then to travel 
through the countryside seeking remote locations for meditation during the 
remaining eight months of the year. 
6 . Page 114 – the full moon observance – The Uposatha day; on each full 
and new moon Buddhist monastics gathered to recite the Rule, listen to 
Dharma teachings and meditate through the night. The same is true for 
the half moons, but without recitation of the Rule. These customs are still 
carried on today .
7 . Page 115 – the chance to hear the words of an enlightened master – 
The preciousness of such opportunities is described in the scriptures many 
times, for example at CV 6.4, M 130.28, A 1.19 and A 6.96.
8 . Page 116 – the Buddha gave progressive instruction – As, for example, 
at M 56.18 and D 3.2.21-2.
9. Page 116 – “It may be that some among you have doubts about the 
spiritual path – This statement comes from D 16.6.5.
10 . Page 116 – what is the best way to … not be seen by the King of Death? 
– This passage comes from ‘The Question of Mogharaja’, at SN 1118-9.
11 . Page 116 – Knowing the body as false as foam – These two verses come 
from the Dhammapada, Dhp 46 and 170. 
12 . Page 116 – her body and her thoughts seemed not really to belong 
to her at all – The deepening of Samavati’s realization here is described 
in terms of her breaking through the first three of what are called the Ten 
Fetters or samyojana in Pali. These are: 1) personality-view (i.e. the belief ‘I 
am this body and this personality’); 2) attachment to conventions and social 
agreements (e.g. the belief that a certain unit of currency – such as a oneeuro coin, a pound or a dollar bill – is of intrinsic worth, or that such-andsuch a ceremony will purify one); and 3) doubt about what is and what is not 
the spiritual path to liberation. 
13 . Page 117 – River Yamuna, which ran north-south below the ramparts 
– The old walls of King Udena’s place are still to be found today, towering 
above the River Yamuna, or Jumna as it is known in modern times.
14 . Page 118 – this was the day when the daughters of … Kosambi – This 
account of the annual festival is based on The Story Cycle of King Udena in the 
Dhammapada Commentary to Dhp verses 21-3; see Buddhist Legends Vol I, p 
269 . 
15 . Page 118 – the annual display of ball games – As in The Pilgrim Kamanita, 
Chapter 4.
16 . Page 120 – this is a day dedicated to the Goddess Sarasvati – The sun 
is in her constellation in mid-April. This is when all South Asia celebrates its 
New Year and enjoys the water/fertility festivals that go with it. In Thailand 
this water festival – which often involves a ritual bathing of Buddha images, 
and sometimes monastics, as well as the widespread hurling of water over all 
and sundry – is called songkran . 
17 . Page 120 – Lady, your father Timbaru great – This song, performed for the 
Buddha by the celestial musician (gandharva) Pañcasikha in the original, is 
found at D 21.1.5, ‘The Questions of Sakka, King of the Gods’. This translation 
is the work of Maurice Walshe; it is reprinted here by kind permission of 
Wisdom Publications. The vina is the ‘Indian lute,’ a stringed instrument 
often mentioned in the scriptures.
18 . Page 112– Father … you have made a grave mistake – This exchange is 
from The Story Cycle of King Udena in the Dhammapada Commentary to Dhp, 
verses 21-3; see Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 269.
19 . Page 123 – It’s a serious thing to come and live in a king’s household 
– This exchange also comes from The Story Cycle of King Udena; see Buddhist 
Legends Vol I, p 282.
Chapter 12
1 . Page 126 – Queen Kinnara of Varanasi – She is mentioned in Jat §536. 
She is described as sneaking out at night for assignations with ‘a loathsome 
misshapen cripple’ under a rose apple tree; see The Jātaka, Vol V, pp 234-5.
2 . Page 126 – Queen Kanha  – She is also found in Jat §536, (ibid . Vol V, p 
225). This royal lady seems to be directly comparable to Queen Draupadi 
of the Mahabharata; even though she’s married to Princes Ajjuna, Nakula, 
Bhimasena, Yudhitthila and Sahadeva, in this story from the Pali scriptures, 
Queen Kanha has her affections set on ‘a headless crippled dwarf’. 
3 . Page 127 – Where have all the flowers come from, Kujj? – This dialogue 
comes from The Story Cycle of King Udena in the Dhammapada Commentary to 
verses 21-3; see Buddhist Legends Vol I, pp 281-2.
4 . Page 127 – No feeling of anger or resentment rose in Samavati’s heart 
– Now that Samavati is on the path to the second level of enlightenment, a 
Once-Returner, such afflictive emotions have very little strength.
5 . Page 127 – Me, Miss, a hunchbacked slave and a thief – In a similar vein, 
the Buddha made a special point of teaching for the sake of Suppabuddha 
the leper, at Ud 5.3. 
Similar instances are recounted at S 11.14, and also in the Dhammapada 
Commentary to verse 203 (see Buddhist Legends, Vol III, pp 74-6), where there 
is a story of the Buddha keeping a large assembly waiting so that a poor 
farmer could arrive and be fed before he gave a teaching.
6 . Page 128 – or he got me to reshape the way I asked it – The Buddha said 
there are four appropriate ways to deal with questions: 1) a straight answer, 
2) a counter-question, 3) to rephrase the question, and 4) to lay the question 
aside. This teaching is found at A 4.43.
7 . Page 128 – as if someone had set upright something that had been 
knocked down – This is a stock description of the arising of faith in the 
Buddha’s teachings. It can be found in numerous places in the scriptures, 
for example at D 3.2.22.
8 . Page 129 – This was said by the Blessed One – As above, Ch 6, note 1.
9 . Page 129 – little or no clothing on the upper part of their bodies – This 
style of dress from that period can be seen in hundreds of reliefs carved into 
the stupas built by King Asoka and others of the early Buddhist era.
10 . Page 130– Even though a bhikkhu might hold on to the hem of my 
robe – This teaching is found at Iti 92.
11 . Page 131 – brought their palms together and, intoned ‘Sadhu!’ three 
times – As is still done today to express gratitude and approval for a teaching.
12 . Page 131 – Angulimala giving up his life as a bandit and then

383
becoming a monk – As is described at M 86, ‘The Discourse on Angulimala’, 
and in The Pilgrim Kamanita Chs 33 and 34. According to the timeline of the 
present story, these events had occurred approximately fifteen years before.
13 . Page 132 – Angulimala lives up in Kosala … at the Jetavana  – The 
Jetavana was the Buddha’s main monastery in Kosala. The foundations of 
Angulimala’s kuti and a stupa for his relics are still to be found there. See 
map on p ii, above. 
14 . Page 133 – He’s a proud man, Miss – In Jat §497, Udena in a previous life 
is the proud and angry son of the Bodhisattva.
15 . Page 133 – the full moon day that marked the end of the Rains – This 
is the full moon of November in the Western calendar. 
16 . Page 133 – she’s a veritable Sita – Sita was the perfectly virtuous and 
beautiful wife of Rama in the Ramayana, the ancient Indian epic. A modernday exploration of her story is to be found in the animated film Sita Sings the 
Blues by Nina Paley – it can be found at www.sitasingstheblues.com.
17 . Page 134 – the brahmin village of Harittananda; this is my daughter, 
Magandiya – Harittananda is an invented name, meaning ‘the joy of gold’. 
In The Story Cycle of King Udena, Magandiya is simply said to have come from 
‘the Kuru country’ north of Vamsa, and from ‘a certain market town’ – see 
Buddhist Legends Vol I, pp 274-5.
18 . Page 136 – an ill-will of vitriolic strength – It is a curious fact that the 
word ‘fascination’ is closely related to this same kind of action; its etymology 
can be traced to phæsi kaino in Greek, meaning ‘to kill with the eyes’.
Chapter 13
1 . Page 139 – what’s a mangala, Mother? ... It’s just a lucky charm, an 
amulet of some sort – This is indeed one meaning of the word mangala. 
Such amulets are very popular still throughout the Buddhist world and 
elsewhere. It can also mean a ‘blessing’ (either mundane or spiritual), a 
magical charm of some kind, or a protective spell. Various other aspects of 
its meaning will become apparent as our tale unfolds.
2 . Page 140 – three-quarters of your father’s fortune – This is not a huge 
exaggeration; in Thailand a Somdet Dtoh amulet was sold in 2008 for about 
£2 million.
3 . Page 140 – a red fish … the words “full-grown” … touching fresh cowdung – These three are all mentioned as mangalas in the introduction to 
Jat §453, the PTS version of which translates the term as ‘omen’; the lucky 
rabbit’s foot is a European superstition.
4 . Page 140 – Ujjeni straddled the River Carmanvati – Today the River 
Carmanvati is called the River Chambal.
5 . Page 140 – the male dhobi-wallahs had their patch a little further 
down-stream – A dhobi-wallah is a professional launderer. Like many other 
aspects of Indian life it is a craft that is passed down from parent to child 
through generations. The methods of washing laundry described here are 
still practised today on riverbanks and ghats throughout India.
6 . Page 142 – this old soldier, Ajjuna – His name has come from one of the 
husbands of Queen Kali in Jat §536. As mentioned at Ch 12, note 2, there is an 
obvious parallel here to the great warrior Arjuna of the Pandava brothers 
in the Mahabharata. In the great battle of that epic story, the god Krishna 
famously takes on the role of charioteer for Arjuna. The Bhagavad Gita 
recounts the dialogue between them just before the fighting commences. 
7 . Page 142 – I don’t say a mangala is a lucky charm – This evasive and 
non-commital form of response is called ‘eel-wriggling’, amara-vikheppika 
in Pali. A good example of it is found in D 1.2.23-28. Note 58 in the Wisdom 
Publications edition of The Long Discourses of the Buddha, p 541, explains more 
about the name.
8 . Page 143 – Vishva who looked after the maintenance of the buildings – 
‘Vishva’ is short for Vishvakarman, the architect of the Vedic gods.
9 . Page 144 – He has the eyes of the kunala bird – This kind of bird with eyes 
of legendary beauty is mentioned in Jat §536. 
10 . Page 144– She had been concerned that … he would get the 
spiritual bug – These are the same concerns that the Buddha’s father, King 
Suddhodana, had when his son was the young Prince Siddhartha.
11 . Page 145 – go and sneak a look at them all bathing – This is indeed 
another famous incident in the life of Lord Krishna. The gopis were milk-maids 
or female cow-herds; they feature very prominently in the Krishna stories of 
Hindu legend. This tale can be found in the Bhagavata Purana, Skanda 10, Ch 22  .
12. Page 147 – ‘spontaneous verse exercises’ – This was a skill much 
practised and admired in ancient times. The Buddha was highly gifted at this 
art; for example, the Dhammapada and the Sutta Nipata are two long poetic 
collections of teachings which were all spontaneously composed by him.
13 . Page 148 – happiness and joy are born from those who are dear to us – 
This statement of Krishna’s is a quotation from a character in ‘The Born From 
Those Who Are Dear Discourse’, which sets in motion a string of dialogues 
and offers the occasion for the Buddha to give a number of very practical 
teachings. It is found at M 87.3. 
14 . Page 149 – Great is the joy of sweet desire – These verses were originally 
uttered by Princess Yashodhara, (the Buddha’s former wife and later a nun 
and an Arahant) in a previous existence when she was with the Bodhisattva. 
The verse appears in Jat §459, in The Jataka, Vol. IV, p 74.
15 . Page 150 – the strength of their love only made the tearing apart 
more agonizing – The Buddha outlined this equation in a few places, for 
example at M 87.3, at Ud 8.8 and Dhp 212-3. This principle is also a major 
theme of The Pilgrim Kamanita; indeed, the simple contemplation that the 
Buddha gives the heroine Vasitthi after she has become a nun – ‘Where there 
is love, there is also suffering’ – is a lynchpin of the story. See The Pilgrim 
Kamanita, Ch 41 . 
16 . Page 150 – he too had had his true love wrenched rudely from him – 
As in the Mahabharata; after Draupadi, the wife of Arjuna and the other four 
Pandava brothers, has been lost in a dice game, the disreputable Dushassana 
drags her off by her hair and the anguished husbands can only sit and watch.
17 . Page 150 – When two great forces oppose each other – This is a 
quotation from the Tao Te Ching, Ch 69, Stephen Mitchell trans. 
Chapter 14
1 . Page 154 – duties that bring them into his chambers – Another instance 
of this type of method is recounted in the novel Raj by Gita Mehta, for 
example, on p 188: ‘“But each time the boys returned to Sirpur, I told the 
younger concubines to remind them of their own customs …”. The Dowager 
Maharani’s voice described how she had sent girl after girl from the harem to 
seduce the awkward schoolboys during their holidays, hoping to recapture 
her grandson’s souls from Britain through their loins.’
2 . Page 154 – Nanda, Kokila, and Ummadanti – Ummadanti is a character in 
Jat §527. In that story the Bodhisattva becomes infatuated with her; in a later 
life, in the time of the Buddha, she became the great Arahant Uppalavanna, 
and the man who is her husband, Ahiparaka in Jat §527, is born as Sariputta, 
the Buddha’s chief disciple. Kokila and Nanda are princesses mentioned in 
Jat §542.
3 . Page 156 – The disreputable monk … bears absolutely no resemblance 
to me – This is an extrapolation of an ability the Buddha possessed and used 
on rare occasions, e.g. when Queen Mallika had died. King Pasenadi went to 
ask the Buddha where she had been reborn but: ‘The Teacher so contrived 
that he should not remember the reason why he had come to him.’ Buddhist 
Legends, Vol II, p 341. Obi Wan Kenobi in the film Star Wars also employs a 
similar ability when his group is challenged by some guards. He utters the 
famous line: ‘These aren’t the droids you’re looking for,’ and they are all 
allowed to pass.
4 . Page 157 – otherwise known as loving-kindness – This quality and the 
cultivation of it through meditation (metta-bhavana in Pali) are considered to 
be of great importance in Buddhist practice. 
5 . Page 157 – you can make yourself invisible – As the Buddha did with 
Yasa, the merchant’s son: ‘Suppose I use my supernormal power so that 
while the merchant is sitting here he will not see Yasa.’ MV 1.7, as recounted 
in The Life of the Buddha by Bhikkhu Nyanamoli, p 49.
6 . Page 158 – I will never lie to you – This is a very significant principle 
in Buddhist practice. Throughout his incalculable number of lives as a 
Bodhisattva, even though he killed and stole, seduced other’s wives etc., 
the one moral precept the Bodhisattva never transgressed was that against 
telling a deliberate lie. As it says in Jat §431: ‘In certain cases a Bodhisatta 
may destroy life, take what is not given, commit adultery, drink strong drink, 
but he may not tell a lie; attended by deception, that violates the reality of 
things.’ See also Jat §422, when, in the First Age of the universe, the being who 
later became Devadatta lies for the first time. No being there understands 
what ‘lie’ means; so they ask about ‘a lie’: ‘Is it blue or yellow or some other

384
colour?’ The Buddha also emphasises this principle in some early advice he 
gave to his seven-year-old son, the novice Rahula: ‘Therefore, Rahula, you 
should train thus: “I will not utter a falsehood, even as a joke.”’ (M 61.1-7).
7 . Page 158 – could bring you confusing or misleading answers – As 
occurs most significantly in The Pilgrim Kamanita on p 167; see also Ch 20, 
note 18 for this passage on pp 306-7 of that book.
8 . Page 158 – Suppose there were a mountain three leagues long – This 
famous simile comes from S 15.5. Three leagues = one yojana = nine miles.
9 . Page 158 – before an æon had passed – The word ‘æon’ here means a 
mahakalpa, the time needed for a world system to arise, develop and perish; 
in traditional Buddhist cosmology this lasts for four ‘incalculable periods’ or 
asankheyya kappas . See also A 3 .114 . 
The OED describes a kalpa as ‘the period between the beginning and the 
end of the world considered as the day of Brahma (4,320 million human 
years)’ – coincidentally, this is roughly the age of Planet Earth.
10 . Page 158 – If there were four accomplished meditators – This comes 
from S 15.7, based on Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation.
11 . Page 159 – The heap of bones one person leaves behind – This comes 
from S 15.10, again, based on Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation.
12 . Page 159 – Truth becomes fiction when the fiction’s true – From The 
Story of the Stone Vol I, p 44. The Chinese of this cryptic statement, when 
transliterated, is:
Jia zuo zhen shi zhen yi jia
Wu wei you chu you huan wu.
This puns and produces the names of the two principal families of The Story of 
the Stone, the Jia (imaginary) family and the Zhen (real) family.
13 . Page 159 – To try to conceive … the Ultimate Beginning – As the 
Buddha says at S 15.1-4, ‘No first beginning is describable.’ This issue is 
one of the Four Imponderables (acinteyya in Pali), the other three are: a) 
the complete workings of karma; b) all aspects of meditative absorption or 
jhana; and c) the range of the mind of a fully enlightened Buddha. These are 
described at A 4.77. The dangers of too much loka-cinta or pondering about 
the origins of the world and ‘Who created the sun and moon? The great 
earth? The ocean? Who begot beings? The mountains? Mangoes, palms and 
coconuts?’ are also described at S 56.41. How it might be that the head would 
be split into seven pieces on such an occasion is recounted, for example, at M 
35.14. A parallel dialogue on this, from Milton’s unique perspective, is to be 
found in Bk VII of Paradise Lost; the passage runs from ll 86-97, where Adam 
asks: ‘How first began this Heav’n …’ to ll 635-6: ‘… thy request think now 
fulfill’d, that ask’d how first this World and face of things began.’
14 . Page 160 – Generations four score hundred – The genealogical structure 
alluded to in these verses is based on such studies as Out of Eden, by Stephen 
Oppenheimer, the documentary The Real Eve and The Journey of Man by 
Spencer Wells; the basic thesis of these is: ‘[T]here was a single common 
ancestor or “Mitochondrial Eve” for all African female lines and then, much 
later, came a subsidiary “Out-of-Africa Eve” line whose genetic daughters 
peopled the rest of the world.’ (Out of Eden, p 46).
This story of the origins of Homo sapiens begins roughly 190,000 years 
ago with Mitochondrial Eve, who was by then one of a very small pocket of 
human survivors: ‘The genetic heritage of modern humans may be derived 
from a core of 2,000-10,000 Africans who lived around 190,000 years ago.’ 
(Out of Eden, p 46). The African exodus across the Gate of Grief is reckoned 
at approximately 81,000 BCE – it involved only one of the thirteen genetic 
lines extant in East Africa at that time (Out of Eden, p 62). The fateful ‘Out-ofAfrica Eve’ was part of this exodus. ‘In fact all the world’s non-Africans could 
have descended from a founding population of only 50 people.’ (Human, p 
31, Ronald Winston and Don E. Wilson eds., Smithsonian Institution/DK 
Publishing).
15 . Page 160 – In dust they drew their marks – As in The Journey of Man, p 84.
16 . Page 160 – all who bridged that died – The first attempts to leave Africa by 
modern humans 90,000-120,000 years ago ended with all dying – they exited 
by the northern corridor of Egypt/Syria. See Out of Eden, p 54.
17 . Page 161 – an ancestral drift – This principle is explained in Out of Eden, 
pp 64-66.
18 . Page 161 – Eleven times ten thousand laps – Dusaka is placing these events 
at around 81,000 years before his retelling, i.e. roughly 110,000 years after 
Mitochondrial Eve . 
19 . Page 161 – The Gate of Grief – Also known as Bab al Mandab, this strait is 
now fifteen miles wide and 450 feet deep. During the periods of glaciation 
such as existed 83,000 years ago, it was only seven miles wide. See Out of Eden 
p 67, and also see map on pp 376-377 above. 
20 . Page 161 – The land had dried, there was no green – ‘Increasing aridity 
of the Eastern African coast … wetter monsoon conditions on the southern 
Yemen coast.’ See Out of Eden, p 78.
21 . Page 162 – But now the salt-thick waters brewed – The salinity increased 
as the sea levels lowered . See Out of Eden, p 9. 
22 . Page 162 – surged round sharpened reefs – The name ‘Gate of Grief’ comes 
from its numerous reefs. See Out of Eden, p 67.
23 . Page 162 – The cold is at its worst – Owing to these conditions there was 
a dramatic lowering of the sea levels during 83-81,000 BCE. The waters fell 
to something like 250 feet below current levels and this ‘sea lowstand’ was 
never repeated. See Out of Eden, p 80.
24 . Page 163 – Their last dried strips of buck – This kind of dried meat, known 
as biltong, is still very popular in Africa.
25 . Page 165 – Combing the fertile shores – As Stephen Oppenheimer puts it, 
the survivors of the exodus succeeded in ‘eating their way down to Indonesia 
in 10,000 years .’ See Out of Eden, p 77.
26 . Page 165 – A mount of fire in the south-east – The eruption of Mount 
Toba in Sumatra took place 72,000 years before Dusaka’s account. It had a 
dramatic effect on most forms of life, especially those in the direct path of its 
ash-cloud, which covered the whole of India.
27 . Page 165 – A burst of growth before unseen – ‘[I]n India, “Rohani” [the 
origin of the burst of new ancestral lines] makes even that fecundity [of the 
earlier Nasreen line] look like family planning.’ See Out of Eden, p 183.
28 . Page 165 – The seed spread north and west and south – “‘Rohani” being 
mother to most Westerners including Europe, not to mention two fareastern daughters with very large families … the expansion can be dated to 
73,000 years ago .’ See Out of Eden, pp 182-3.
29 . Page 165 – The Mother of all Birth – ‘Thence be call’d the Mother of the 
human Race.’ Milton, Paradise Lost, Bk I, l 43 .
Chapter 15
1 . Page 167 – War in Heaven – The title of this chapter comes from Paradise 
Lost, Book I, l 43 .
2 . Page 167 – an asura who’d been trussed up after losing a fight – As is 
described at S 11.4 and at S 35.248.
3 . Page 167 – the story-tellers who come from the far west – In this 
instance, Persia/Iran. 
4 . Page 168 – these so-called “deities” are just random inventions, 
phlegm-gob – This choice term of abuse comes from the Pali khelapaka, or 
khelasika. It was even used by the Buddha on one occasion, to chastise the 
behaviour of his malevolent cousin Devadatta (CV 7.2).
5 . Page 168 – the Kirthar mountain range – These are the mountains 
between India and Iran. These reflections come courtesy of Carl Sagan, from 
his novel Contact, p 199. See map on p ii, above. 
6 . Page 168 – Vajrapani with a thunderbolt – As is described at M 35.14: ‘Now 
on that occasion a thunderbolt-wielding spirit holding an iron thunderbolt 
that burned, blazed and glowed, appeared in the air above Saccaka the 
Nigantha’s son, thinking: “If this Saccaka the Nigantha’s son, when asked a 
reasonable question up to the third time by the Blessed One, still does not 
answer, I shall split his head into seven pieces here and now.”’ ‘Vajrapani’ 
literally means ‘lightning-’ or ‘diamond-fist’. See also Ch 14, note 13.
7 . Page 168 – no gods and spirits, no other worlds – Faith in the existence 
of other realms, past or future lives etc. is part of ‘mundane Right View’ in 
the Buddha’s teaching. This is outlined, for example, at M 117.7: ‘there is this 
world and the other world .’
8 . Page 168 – He’s just doubting that which should be doubted – This is 
an important feature of the Buddhist approach to understanding how things 
work. It is well described in the Kalama Sutta, A 3.65.
9 . Page 170 – made his mind too sharp ... felt his mood go flat – At S 1 .1 the 
Buddha describes his own efforts to find the right balance: ‘When I struggled 
I got swept away when I halted, I sank … by not halting and not straining, I 
crossed the flood.’ The Buddha also encouraged the former vina-player Sona 
Kolivisa by reminding him of how he used to tune his stringed instrument – 
this story is to be found at A 6.55 and MV 5.1.
10 . Page 170 – at the very moment he gave up – It was also at the moment 
of giving up that Ven. Ananda’s full enlightenment occurred, just before the 
First Council; see CV 11.1.

385
11 . Page 171 – at first the three rosy-coloured devas were all he saw – The 
succession of beings described here (roughly) matches traditional Buddhist 
cosmology, from the earth spirits up to the formless deities. 
the very stuff of green- and tree-life – Bhumma-deva, the earth spirits
then stately folk of brawny arms and steady eye – Retinue of the Four 
Great Kings
multi-coloured grand array – Heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods
as once again the host increased – Yama-deva, the ‘Devas of the Hours’
radiant lights and fragrances – Tusita-deva, the ‘Contented’
tiers of light – The Heaven of Those who Delight in Creating
and grew again – The Heaven of Those Who Delight in Other’s Creations
radiance that would have burned – Brahma-realms of Form
all form was lost – Formless Brahma-realms
beyond the realm of space – The highest of the formless Brahmarealms. 
D 20.6 also highlights how different beings experience things in different 
ways: 
‘With superhuman vision thus arising
some saw a hundred gods, a thousand some.
While some saw seventy thousand, others saw
Gods innumerable, all around
And He-Who-Knows-With-Insight was aware
Of all that they could see and understand.’ 
12 . Page 171 – he was the universe itself – This is a delusion of Krishna’s, 
albeit an understandable one. The Buddha describes this kind of error at M 
1.25: ‘He conceives himself as All, why? Because he has not understood it, 
I say .’
13 . Page 172 – On a bad day we can be shot with an arrow – For example, 
in Jat §485, when the Bodhisattva was just such a kinnari, it is recounted that 
a king out hunting, ‘… shot the fairy Canda … “my blood is flowing, flowing” …’ 
(The Jataka Vol IV, p 180). Other kinnaris are kidnapped and imprisoned, as in 
Jat §481, with the king who captures them ordering: ‘Kill these creatures and 
cook them, and serve them up to me.’ 
14 . Page 173 – the royal naga who often stays here in the palace lake 
… Samuddaja – This dragon-princess appears in Jat §543; her father was a 
human prince, her mother a nagi.
15 . Page 173 – Princess Irandati is the beloved of General Punnaka – The 
story of Princess Irandati and General Punnaka is found in Jat §545.
16 . Page 173 – the capital of that beauteous land is named Masakkasara 
– The description of Masakkasara and its parks can be found in Jat §545, and 
in Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp 224-5.
17 . Page 173 – the Prince Suvira … was busy at his pleasure – He was wellknown as a distractable and pleasure-seeking character – see for example 
S 11 .1 .
18 . Page 174 – Vepacitti and his band – Vepacitti is an asura who appears 
a number of times in the scriptures, for example in the Sakka-samyutta at S 
11 .4,  .5,  .7 and  .23 .
19 . Page 174 – The dryad Alambusa – Her name comes from that of an apsara 
of great beauty, mentioned in Jat §523.
20 . Page 174– King Rahu … Yugandhara Mountain – The asura king and 
the great mountain are described in Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp 
109-10.
21 . Page 174 – an evil bourne awaits all those who lie – On one occasion 
(quoted at S 11.7) Vepacitti also makes this observation to Indra: 
‘Whatever evil comes to a liar
… that same evil touches the one
who transgress against you, Suja’s husband.’
22 . Page 174 – I do not dispute with the world – This famous statement was 
made by the Buddha at S 22.94.
23 . Page 175 – One year there was a drought – This account comes from the 
Dhammapada Commentary to Dhp verses 197-9; see Buddhist Legends, Vol III, 
pp 70-72; also see the introduction to Jat § 536.
24 . Page 175 – While in the midst of hate – This is Dhp 197.
25 . Page 177 – He helps turn … their tortures into violent reaction 
against the torturers – ‘turning our Tortures into horrid arms against the 
Torturer.’ Paradise Lost, Bk II, ll 63-64.
26 . Page 177 – delighted to help the devas – As King Maradhiraja, Mara is 
the ruler of The Heaven of Those Who Delight in Other’s Creations; that is to 
say, he’s the brightest deva of the Sensual Realms (kama-loka) . In this role he 
is thus a figure highly comparable to the biblical Lucifer, the ‘Light-bringer’, 
formerly the brightest of all archangels.
27 . Page 178 – a murderous glee took him over – As in M 50.21 – ‘Then the 
Mara Dusi took possession of a certain boy and, picking up a stone, he struck 
the Venerable Vidhura on the head.’ Vidhura was the chief disciple of the 
Buddha Kakusandha.
Chapter 16
1 . Page 182 – she dreaded a similar urge being awakened – As it was in the 
life of the Buddha; this is described, for example, at A 3.38.
2 . Page 182 – You are a vaishya … that’s your dharma – This fixity of roles 
was, apparently, a little less formalized in the Buddha’s time, but was made 
more specific with the Laws of Manu, a set of social codes that were compiled 
by the Manavans about 500 years later. The Sanskrit name for these laws is 
Manava-Dharmasastra or Manu-smriti .
3 . Page 184 – A woman has a dream – This is an accurate rendering of a 
dream recounted by a young mother in England in the early ’80s. It occurred 
shortly after the two-year-old child of a close friend died when the car she 
was in exploded. 
4 . Page 184 – for Mara, evil is his good – In Paradise Lost the recently fallen 
Satan reflects: ‘So farewell Hope, and with Hope farewell Fear, farewell 
Remorse; all Good to me is lost; Evil be thou my Good.’ (Bk IV, ll 108-110).
5 . Page 185 – by your very effort to destroy something, you ended up 
making it stronger – At S 11.22 the Buddha tells a story of just how such 
a thing happens when an ‘anger-eating demon’ comes to visit Lord Indra’s 
palace. The celestial monarch happens to be away when an ugly little 
sprite wanders in and sits itself down on the throne. All the attempts of the 
courtiers to get rid of it only cause it to swell in size and increase in power 
and beauty. When Indra returns from his travels and discerns what’s going 
on, he greets the occupant of his throne politely and engages in friendly 
conversation. As he does so the demon shrinks and soon spontaneously 
disappears. 
6 . Page 186 – the place was strangely tidy – Buddhist monastics are 
required to tidy their dwelling places before leaving; indeed, they supposed 
to leave the living-space in better shape than they found it.
7 . Page 186 – the royal nagas in the lake, Virupakkha and Samuddaja – In 
traditional Buddhist cosmology Virupakkha is one of the four Guardians of 
the World (Lokapalas) and he rules the Western Quarter, the realm of nagas 
– see above, Ch 8, note 1. 
Without wishing to confuse matters, it might also be mentioned that 
one Dhatarattha is named as a king of nagas, and he and Samuddaja are 
mentioned as a couple in Jat §543 (The Jataka, Vol VI, pp 84ff). 
8 . Page 187 – When one sees with perfect wisdom – These verses come 
from S 15.10; they are the second part of the verses about Vepulla Mountain 
quoted above in Ch 14, p 159 – see above, Ch 14 note 11.
9 . Page 188 – Bhogavati, the naga capital under the Himalayan Lake 
Anotatta – This lake is often identified with Lake Manasarovar, which lies 
at the foot of Mount Kailash, in Tibet. It was visited several times by the 
Buddha, for example at MV 1.19, ‘Then the Blessed One, understanding by 
the power of his mind this reflection which had arisen in the mind of the 
jatila Uruvela Kassapa, went to Uttara Kuru; having begged alms there, he 
took the food (he had received) to the Anotatta lake; there he took his meal 
and rested during the heat of the day at the same place.’ Anotatta literally 
means ‘no heat’.
10 . Page 192 – the Katthika month – This is roughly equivalent to the month 
of November in the Western calendar. 
11 . Page 192 – the face of the Hunter – As in M 25.7, the Discourse on The 
Bait: ‘“Deer-trapper” is a term for Mara, the Evil One.’ Interestingly, the verb 
‘to kill’ or ‘to strike’ in Pali is hanati, and hantar in Pali means ‘The Killer’. 
Another term for this is mareta or maretar, from the verb mareti, ‘to kill’, as 
used at S 23.1: ‘Radha, see material form as Mara, see it as the killer … so too 
feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness.’
12 . Page 192 – during the Eight Days of Frost – The coldest part of the 
Indian mid-winter was known by this name in the Buddha’s time.
13 . Page 192 – ‘Living beings,’ he mused, ‘are so gullible.’ – Apparently this 
English word comes from the Latin gula, derived originally from the Pali/
Sanskrit gala = swallow, + bala = fool; the compound galabaliso thus means 
‘foolish swallowing’ or ‘taking the bait’.
Chapter 17
1 . Page 198 – They say you have a charm – As in The Story Cycle of King Udena, 
in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 271.

386
2 . Page 198 – to go dressed in plain white clothing – It is customary for 
devout followers of the Buddhist religion, particularly in the southern 
Buddhist countries, to wear plain white or black and white clothing when 
visiting the temple, and to forgo the use of jewellery and perfumes. This 
practice is followed particularly on the lunar observance days (the full, new 
and half-moons), or for a special event or festival. The Pali scriptures often 
refer to ‘the white-clad laity’, e.g. at A 5.195.
3 . Page 199 – A good king should display – These are the ten raja-dhammas 
or Royal Virtues. They are mentioned in several places in the Jatakas, e.g. 
Jats §§151 and 282.
4 . Page 199 – one worthy of ruling the world – These qualities of a Universal 
Monarch are listed at D 25 .6 .
5 . Page 200 – that the Queen had those windows put in – As in Buddhist 
Legends Vol I, p 282. In the original story it was Khujjuttara who had the idea 
of putting viewing-holes in the wall.
6 . Page 201– The concealment of another’s fault – In many of the more 
serious monastic rules it is also regarded as a wrongdoing, sometimes even 
of an equal weight, for a monk or nun to hide another’s transgression.
7 . Page 202 – That’s not you under a dupatta, is it? – A dupattta is a 
long, multi-purpose scarf or shawl that usually matches a woman’s other 
garments. 
8 . Page 203 – if a queen has five husbands – As quoted above, Ch 12, note 2.
9 . Page 203 – fewer than 16,000 concubines – This refers to Jat §489: ‘Such 
a King should have 16,000 women at the least.’ Also, comparable comments 
are made at Jats §§461, 472, 538 and 460, where the Bodhisattva is one of 
1,000 sons of King Sabbadatta.
10 . Page 204 – like the avenging Goddess Durga  – She is an aspect of 
Mother Kali and is usually depicted with many weapon-weilding arms. Her 
name means ‘one who can redeem in situations of utmost distress’.
11 . Page 204 – a strong emphasis on love for all beings – As in the 
Karaniyametta Sutta: ‘Even as a mother protects with her life her child, her 
only child, so with a boundless heart should one cherish all living beings.’ 
(SN 143-152).
12 . Page 204 – not trying to suggest we like the unlikeable – As described 
in Mindfulness: The Path to the Deathless, by Ajahn Sumedho, pp 35-38. 
13 . Page 204 – to the palace of Vejayanta – As mentioned, for example, at M 
37.8: ‘It once happened that war broke out between the devas and the asuras. 
In that war the devas won and the asuras were defeated. When I had won 
that war and returned from it as a conqueror, I had the Vejayanta Palace 
built.’
14 . Page 205 – the nine gems of the Bejaratana – The legend of Bejaratana 
– the Nine Auspicious Gems – associates these stones with different parts 
of the body: 
heart – diamond and ruby lymph – moonstone
right eye – cat’s eye blood (as spewed by the
left eye – garnet naga Pasukin) – yellow sapphire,
tongue – coral blue sapphire and emerald.
15 . Page 205 – Lord Vepacitti is the father of my beloved Queen, Suja  
– This curious fact is mentioned at Jats §§386, 429 and 430; also at S 11.12: 
‘Sakka’s wife is the asura maiden named Suja.’ The story of how this odd 
couple came to be married is found in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, pp 313-324.
16 . Page 205 – Varuna and Isana – The former is named as a deva-king in 
Jats §§513 and 543; an eminent naga of the same name appears in Jat §545. 
The latter is another name for Lord Shiva; he is mentioned along with 
Varuna as a deva-king at D 13.25 and S 11.3.
17 . Page 206 – Rhamba, the leader of the dance – Rambha is the queen of 
the apsaras and was accordingly one of the most famous of them, along with 
Urvasi, Menaka and Tilottama. They are magical and beautiful female beings, 
dwelling in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings.
Rambha is unrivalled in her accomplishments in the arts of dancing, 
music and love-making. She is often, in the stories, asked by Indra to break 
the spiritual resolve of ascetics so that the purity of their austerities is 
tested by temptation, and also so that the order of the universe remains 
undisturbed by any one person’s mystical powers. 
In the epic Ramayana, Rambha is violated by Ravana, king of Lanka, who 
is thereby cursed by Brahma that if he violates another woman again, his 
head will burst. This curse protects the chastity of Sita, the wife of Rama 
when she is kidnapped by Ravana.
Rambha is the wife of Nalakuvara, the son of Vessavana (aka Kuvera), the 
king of the yakkhas. 
Generally the female apsaras have the male gandharvas as their husbands. 
The women dance and the men make the music in the classical tales.
18 . Page 206 – these cloud-devas – The valahaka have a whole section of the 
Samyutta Nikaya dedicated to them, S 32. All these various forms of clouddeva are mentioned there.
19 . Page 206 – his Sindh horse with its golden ears – As described at Jat 
§545, The Jataka, Vol VI, p 131.
20 . Page 206 – Princess Irandati … took the mailed hand – As at Jat §545, 
The Jataka, Vol VI, p 131.
21 . Page 207 – the great Bodhisattva Utpalabhuti – As mentioned in the 
Avatamsaka Sutra, in the chapter entitled ‘Entry into the Realm of Reality’. 
This spiritually advanced perfumer, whose name means ‘born of the blue 
lotus’, is the twenty-first Bodhisattva encountered by the youth Sudhana in 
his quest for enlightenment. See Entry into the Realm of Reality – The Text, trans . 
Thomas Cleary, Shambhala Publications, pp 134-5.
22 . Page 207 – the Bodhisattva “Adorned with Fragrance” – This great 
spiritual being – who used the realm of scent as a spiritual method – is 
mentioned in the Shurangama Sutra, 5.30. This method of realization is 
one of twenty-five presented to the Buddha as possible approaches to 
enlightenment. See The Shurangama Sutra, p 125, Dharma Realm Buddhist 
Association .
23 . Page 208 – its glorious top and middle tones … base note – These terms 
are used as part of the description of a similarly mysterious and exotic scent 
in Jitterbug Perfume by Tom Robbins. 
24 . Page 208 – Watch out! Watch Out! It’s a snake! – This latter part of 
the chapter is mostly derived from The Story Cycle of King Udena in Buddhist 
Legends, Vol I, pp 285-6.
25 . Page 209 – gently remove a posy of flowers – In the original tale it is 
Magandiya herself, who had contrived to be present, who removes the 
flowers.
26 . Page 210 – He pulled the string of the great bow and aimed the arrow 
at Samavati – A similar incident is recounted in the Ambattha Sutta, D 3.1.23 
where the Buddha speaks of Ambattha’s ancestor Kanha (Skt = Krishna), who 
was the black-skinned son of the slave-girl Disa. He says: ‘Don’t disparage 
Ambattha too much for being the son of a slave-girl! That Kanha was a 
mighty sage. He went to the south country [the Deccan], learnt the mantras 
of the brahmins there, and then went to King Okkaka and asked for his 
daughter Maddarupi. And King Okkaka, furiously angry, exclaimed: “So this 
fellow, the son of a slave-girl, wants my daughter!” and put an arrow to his 
bow. But he was unable to either shoot the arrow or to withdraw it. Then 
the ministers and counsellors came to the sage Kanha and said: “Spare the 
king, Reverend Sir, spare the king!’” The king was then told by Kanha that 
the only way out of this dilemma was to fire the arrow at the crown prince. 
Kanha assured him that if he did so the prince would be unharmed. The king 
obeyed under this duress and the prince was indeed happily unscathed. 
The king then offered his daughter Maddarupi to Kanha in marriage. In the 
original tale King Udena only fires one arrow and no yakkha is mentioned as 
providing protection.
Chapter 18
1 . Page 213 – his yellow-stone throne – Reference is often made to Indra’s 
throne; it grows hot for the kind of reasons mentioned in the story, and also 
when Lord Indra has exhausted his merit and when his life is drawing to an 
end; see, for example Jats §§440, 472, 480 etc. It is also said to tremble when a 
deed of great virtue is being performed, e.g. at Jat §488.
2 . Page 214 – like a strangling fig, or maybe a maluva creeper – Two 
Jataka stories use the nature of such parasitic figs as a way of illustrating the 
dangers of tolerating even the slightest amount of unwholesomeness – these 
are Jats §§370 and 412. (See also Bhikkhu Bodhi’s note on S 46.39 re these 
plants, in the Connected Discourses V, note 81). On the perilous properties 
of the ‘tender, soft, downy tendril of the maluva-creeper’, see M 45.4: ‘The 
creeper enfolded the sala tree, made a canopy over it, draped a curtain all 
around it, and split the main branches of the tree.’

387
3. Page 214-5 – he went through Kosambi on his alms-round – This 
account of the quarrel and the Buddha’s departure is largely as found in M 
48, M 128, MV 10.1-3 and S 22.81. An excellent telling of the whole sorry tale 
is to be found in The Life of the Buddha by Bhikkhu Nyanamoli, pp 109-119, BPS.
4 . Page 216 – teachings over … weeks on how to establish concord – These 
are the Six Memorable Qualities, the saraniya-dhammas, as at M 48 .6 .
5 . Page 216 – many tales of his former lives – Such as Jats §§357 and 33, as 
mentioned in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 177.
6 . Page 216 – Enough, bhikkhus, stop all this quarrelling – This passage 
comes from M 128.4-6.
7 . Page 218 – Ananda would be invited to the palace – This turn of events 
comes from The Story Cycle of King Udena once again; see Buddhist Legends, Vol 
I, p 287.
8 . Page 218 – using a Gandhara charm – This vijja is mentioned at D 11.5; it 
was used to render oneself invisible.
9 . Page 220 – his women all gazing adoringly – This description of Udena 
taking offence at his court women’s feelings of devotion to the Venerable 
Ananda is recounted in Buddhist Legends Vol I, p 287: ‘One day, after they had 
listened to the Elder’s discourse on the Dhamma, their hearts were filled 
with joy and they rendered honour to the Elder by presenting him with 500 
yellow robes.’ A similar but more canonical account is found in the books of 
the Monastic Rule, at CV 11.13-14. It is also cited by the author in Three Robes 
is Enough in the anthology Hooked! – Buddhist writings on greed, desire and the 
urge to consume, ed. by Stephanie Kaza, Shambhala Publications. 
10 . Page 220 – flower-liquor, puppha-rasa – This kind of alcoholic drink is 
mentioned at Vin I 246.
11 . Page 220 – they stopped donating food in the morning – As recounted 
in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 178: ‘The monks got so little food they were nearly 
famished and it required only a few days to bring them to a better state of 
mind.’
12 . Page 222 – Sharing the goodness – The principle of sharing blessings, 
(merit, or puñña in Pali) is a central practice in Buddhist tradition. See The 
Sharing of Blessings on pp pp 32-33 in the book Chanting Volume 1, Morning 
and Evening Chanting and Reflections – https://www.amaravati.org/
dhamma-books/chanting-book/
13 . Page 223 – I was the daughter of King Canda Pajjota – This account 
is largely as found in The Story of Cycle of King Udena, Buddhist Legends, Vol I, 
pp 270-272.
Chapter 19
1 . Page 229 – Brekkek, kekkek, kekkek, kekkek! – This small collection of 
odd words comes from Finnegans Wake by James Joyce, p 4. On this passage 
Joseph Campbell writes: ‘The guttural sound “brékkek kóax”, borrowed from 
Aristophanes’ comedy The Frogs, suggests a swampy damp terrain … “Ual” 
and “Quáouau”: Welsh cries of lament.’ (A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake, p 31).
2 . Page 229 – surrounded by bonfires – This is the ascetic yogic discipline 
called ‘the five fires’ – it is still practised today by Hindu yogis, as are all the 
austerities described here.
3 . Page 229 – Mingi forefa, kalegha shanesto – These words are an adaptation 
of Heather Moore’s inspired CAPTCHA security code poems, as described 
on her Skinny laMinx weblog – http://www.skinnylaminx.com/2008/11/
security-poetry.html.
4 . Page 230 – a good samana – Samanas or wanderers are part of the highly 
varied clan of spiritual seekers in India. They are meditators and ascetics 
who live a homeless and harmless life. They are often contrasted with the 
brahmins; these are householders having families and playing the role of 
ritual priests. ‘Samana’ literally means ‘a calm one’ – it is also the origin of the 
word ‘shaman’ in European lore.
5 . Page 231 – following the breath to calm his thoughts – This is the 
meditation called ‘mindfulness of breathing’. It is a method greatly praised 
by the Buddha and practised by him throughout his long life as a monk. See 
for example M 118 and S 54.11 ‘If anyone, bhikkhus, speaking rightly could 
say of anything: “It is a noble dwelling, a divine dwelling, the Tathagata’s 
dwelling”, it is of concentration by mindfulness of breathing that one could 
rightly say this .’ 
6 . Page 231 – repeating a mantra  – This is another classic form of 
meditation; a single word or a phrase is repeated over and over internally 
in order to calm and focus the mind. A very common mantra used in Thai 
Buddhist practice is the word ‘Buddho’ – the name of the Buddha – repeating 
Bud- on the inbreath and -dho on the outbreath.
7 . Page 231 – true wanderers … never used money – This is a rule still 
followed by the stricter lineages of Buddhist monastic training and some of 
the groups of wanderers in India today. 
8 . Page 237 – the candalas and matangas – These are two of the lowest rungs 
in the caste system, the candalas being the ‘untouchables’ (see Ch 5, note 13) 
and the matangas also being below the workers’ caste (the sudras) . In the 
famous incident of Ananda asking for water at the well from the matanga girl 
Pakati, she says: ‘Oh brahmin, I am too lowly and inferior to give you water. 
Do not ask any service of me, for by that your purity will be contaminated as I 
am of low caste.’ The Venerable Ananda memorably replied: ‘I did not ask for 
caste but for water.’ The woman thus became deeply impressed and inspired 
by him – later even becoming an Arahant nun. (See Divyāvadāna 33, as in The 
Gospel of Buddha by Paul Carus, 1894).
9 . Page 239 – ‘keeping the postures even’ – Ajahn Chah made the same 
error of interpretation with respect to this way of establishing mindfulness 
of the body; he describes his mistake: ‘At first thought it seems as if you 
should stand for as long as you walk, walk for as long as you sit, sit for as long 
as you lie down. I’ve tried it but I couldn’t do it. If a meditator were to make 
his standing, walking, sitting and lying down all equal, how many days could 
he keep it up for? Stand for five minutes, sit for five minutes, lie down for 
five minutes. I couldn’t do it for very long. So I sat down and thought about 
it some more. ‘What does it all mean? People in this world can’t practise like 
this!’ From The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah, p 283.
10 . Page 239 – ‘the cessation of perception and feeling’ – Rather than being 
a rock-like state of insensitivity, this term actually refers to one of the most 
refined of all levels of meditative concentration.
11 . Page 239 – the more pain he felt, the more bad karma he had burned 
off – As the Buddha recounts in his description of a dialogue with some 
disciples of the Jain leader, the Nigantha Nataputta, he asked: ‘But friends, 
do you know that so much suffering has been exhausted, or that so much 
suffering has still to be exhausted?’ They were under the impression that 
suffering was being burned off by ‘the performance of piercing austerities’ 
(M14.17-18). They did not know the answer to the Buddha’s question, yet 
still they asserted: ‘Pleasure is not to be gained through pleasure, pleasure is 
to be gained through pain.’ To which the Buddha replied: ‘But friends, I can 
abide without moving my body or uttering a word, experiencing the peak 
of pleasure for … seven days and nights,’ indicating that liberating spiritual 
practice can also be highly enjoyable. (M 14.20-22).
12 . Page 240 – his farewell letter, composed … on an ola-palm leaf – This 
type of palm leaf was used in southern Asia for many centuries as one of the 
media for the written word. 
13 . Page 241– this misery really isn’t of much use to any of us – This reflects 
the Buddha’s own intuition that such painful austerities were fruitless, 
as described at M 36.30 ‘by this racking practice of austerities I have not 
attained any super-human states, any distinction in knowledge and vision 
worthy of the noble ones. Could there be another path to enlightenment?’
14 . Page 241 – I am … the lord and protector of water- and tree-devas – 
Vessavana is named as such at Jat §398.
15 . Page 241 – avowed to guard the safety of the world – He is one of the 
four Great Kings who are also known as the Lokapala, the guardians of the 
world (see, e.g. D 18.12, and also above Ch 4, note 5). 
16 . Page 241– cintamani-vijja – This ‘wish-fulfilling gem charm’ is mentioned 
at D 11.7; there it is called the ‘manika charm’.
17 . Page 242 – We nagas are the favourite food of the garudas – Many 
classical Buddhist legends describe how the nagas and the garudas (also 
known as supannas) are ancient foes, which is hardly surprising since nagas 
are the favourite food of those giant eagles. For example, at D 20.11, the 
verses recounting a unique maha-samaya, ‘a mighty gathering’, describe how:
‘... the twice-born, winged and clear of sight,
Fierce garuda birds (the nagas’ foes) have come
Flying here – Citra and Supanna.
But here the naga kings are safe: the Lord
Has imposed a truce. With gentle speech
They and the nagas share the Buddha’s peace.
18 . Page 243 – There are forms, monks – This teaching of the Buddha is 
found at S 35.115.
19 . Page 244 – five different shades of red – To possess ‘hair of five colours’ 
was an attribute of rare auspiciousness in ancient folklore. See for example 
The King of Ireland’s Son by Padraic Colum, p 288, (Henry Holt and Co. 1916,

388
Dover Publications, 1997): ‘A girl she was and wherever the sun was it shone 
on her, and wherever the breeze was it rippled over her. White as the snow 
upon a lake frozen over was the girl, and as beautiful as flowers and as alive 
as birds were her eyes, while her cheeks had the red of fox-gloves and her 
hair was the blending of five bright soft colors. She looked at Flann happily 
and her eyes had the kind look that was always in Morag’s eyes . And she 
came and knelt down, putting her hands on his knees. 
‘“I am Morag, Flann,” she said.
‘“Morag indeed,” said he, “but how have you become so fair?”
‘“I have eaten the berry from the Fairy Rowan Tree”, said she …’.
Chapter 20
1 . Page 248 – the Vipasa River that flowed below Kulluta – This village is 
nowadays known as Kullu and is on the Beas River, this being a contraction 
of ‘Vipasa’, the ancient Indian name. This was the furthest point east reached 
by Alexander’s armies as they made their invasion of India. To them it 
was known as the River Hyphasis. It is a tributary of the Sutlej River and 
subsequently the Indus. Kullu is about fifteen miles from ancient Jalandhara. 
2 . Page 249 – It was a stone and wood structure – In the Kullu area 
houses are still built this way, with stone walls layered at about four foot 
intervals with lengths of thick cedar timber. This is so that during the many 
earthquakes that occur in the region, the stones and the wood can slide 
across each other and the building will remain standing.
3 . Page 251 – he had indeed grown to enjoy it – This kind of enjoyment, as 
one might suspect, is completely contrary to the life of a true samana . As it 
says in Ashvaghosha’s Life of the Buddha 11.67: 
‘The pleasure that a man living here
derives from his harming another being, 
is unwelcome to a wise and compassionate man.’ 
4 . Page 252 – Karuna, Sugandhi’s mother – Her name means ‘compassion’.
5 . Page 253 – Yeshe Tsogyal, the consort of Padma Sambhava  – In 
the eighth century CE the Tibetan King Trisong Detsen, having faith in 
Buddhism, invited the great sage Padma Sambhava of Uddiyana (the country 
to the immediate north-west of Gandhara, in modern Afghanistan), and the 
esteemed Indian monk Sangharakshita to Tibet. Yeshe Tsogyal was a Tibetan 
princess; she became the student and consort of Padma Sambhava and by 
some accounts was the first Tibetan ever to attain complete enlightenment. 
She became a guru of great power and wisdom (see Lady of the Lotus-Born by 
Gyalwa Changchub and Namkhai Nyingpo, Shambhala Publications).
6 . Page 253 – She could turn herself into a flying tigress – The place 
where they landed and then lived in a cave on one such excursion is now the 
location of the monastery called The Tiger’s Nest; it is near Paro in Bhutan.
7 . Page 253 – Tilopa had his student Naropa go thieving – This was just 
one of many painful trials the maha-siddha (master of enlightenment) 
Tilopa put Naropa through. They lived in India around the tenth century 
CE; Tilopa 988-1069 CE, Naropa 956-1041 CE; Naropa subsequently also 
became an accomplished sage. A comprehensive and beautifully illustrated 
compendium of the biographies of these 84 great beings is found in Masters 
of Enchantment – the lives and legends of the Mahasiddhas, translated by Keith 
Dowman and illustrated by Robert Beer, published by Inner Traditions.
8 . Page 253 – Marpa – he had Milarepa build and take down a stone tower 
seven times – Also in the lineage of maha-siddhas, Marpa was a student of 
Naropa and brought this particular brand of accomplishment to Tibet in the 
eleventh century CE; Marpa 1012-1097 CE.
9 . Page 254 – shovelling dung and rotting giblets – this is the nectar of 
training! – Another of the classical maha-siddhas, Luipa, lived for twelve 
years by eating the rotting fish-guts thrown away at the market. Again, his 
story is found in Masters of Enchantment, pp 33-4. 
10 . Page 255 – the murderer who built towers, dwelt in a cave and turned 
green from living on nettles – These are some more incidents from the 
highly colourful life of the great yogi, Milarepa: 1052-1135 CE. His story can 
be found in detail in The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, Shambhala 
Publications.
11 . Page 258 – you are the victor – Jaya is the Pali for ‘victory’; ‘Jayanta’ 
therefore means ‘victorious one’.
Chapter 21
1 . Page 263 – ever loved and lauded Ananda – The great elder Ananda 
was indeed popular and highly appreciated. The Buddha once said of him: 
‘Ananda has four remarkable and wonderful qualities. What are they? If a 
company of monks comes to see Ananda, they are pleased at the sight of him, 
and when Ananda talks Dhamma to them they are pleased, and when he is 
silent they are disappointed. And so it is too with nuns and with women and 
men among the lay followers.’ (D 16.5.16).
2 . Page 263 – if you knew, as I know – This teaching is found at Iti 26. It was 
also quoted in The Pilgrim Kamanita on p 203.
3 . Page 264 – Samavati was moved to think of something to offer him – 
This incident is recounted in various forms at CV 11.13-14 and in Buddhist 
Legends, Vol I, p 287, (see above, Ch 18, note 9). 
4 . Page 264 – Suguda – far to the north-west of here – This area is referred 
to by historians as Sogdiana. It was just to the north of Bactria; its capital was 
Maracanda, known today as Samarkand. The region is now called Uzbekistan 
and includes some of the modern state of Tajikistan. See map on pp 376-377.
5 . Page 267 – he could recite the entire Triple Veda  – These are the 
scriptures of the Hindu religion as they existed during the time of the 
Buddha. Such an ability, to recite the Vedic Canon by heart, was considered 
a sign of a significantly accomplished spiritual practitioner, for example at D 
3.1.3, ‘Now at that time Pokkharasati had a pupil, the youth Ambattha, who 
was a student of the Vedas, who knew the mantras, was perfected in the 
Three Vedas, a skilled expounder of the rules and rituals.’
6 . Page 268 – born of the mouth of Lord Brahma Himself – As it says 
in the Pali texts: ‘the brahmins say this: “brahmins are the highest caste, 
those of any other caste are inferior; brahmins are the fairest caste, those 
of any other castes are dark; only brahmins are purified, not non-brahmins; 
brahmins alone are the children of Brahma, born of his mouth, born of 
Brahma, created by Brahma, heirs of Brahma”,’ (M 84.4).
7 . Page 268 – our children will be velamikas – A velamika was a person born 
half kshatriya, half brahmin. According to the laws and customs of India at 
that time a velamika would be accepted as a brahmin and allowed to take part 
in all the brahmin rituals, although they would not necessarily be accepted 
as a kshatriya. This disparity of roles is described at D 3.1.24-25, and would be 
sure to have rankled someone like Magandiya.
8 . Page 268 – He preaches against brahmins – As with Magandiya’s other 
assertions, this is something of a misrepresentation. The Buddha did speak 
out against the caste system in his teaching, it is true. For example, many 
aspects of his outlook on this issue are represented by his enlightened 
disciple Maha-Kaccana in M 84, where, over and over again, the monk states: 
‘These four castes are all the same; there is no difference between them at 
all that I can see … that statement of the brahmins [on their superiority] is 
just a saying in the world.’ However, the Buddha also highlighted what he 
saw as the qualities of ‘a true brahmin’, one who is pure-hearted and noble: 
Neither matted hair nor so-called high family, 
Nor states of birth make one a true brahmin.
By one’s own actions in the practice of truth
Does one become a brahmin true. 
Dhp 393
I do not call someone a true brahmin merely by reason of birth,
Just because they came from a noble mother,
Only if free from all attachments, from worldly grasping,
Then will I call that person a brahmin true. 
Dhp 396
9 . Page 269 – the first of the washerwomen crossed her shadow – 
According to the ritual observances of the brahmins, not only should they 
never touch a low-caste person; they should never let an ‘untouchable’, 
a candala, even so much as touch their shadow. Should this occur, the 
unfortunate candala would be severely punished, often in extreme and 
painful ways. There are many horror stories about innocent people having 
their eyes put out or having molten lead poured into their ears, just because 
a brahmin wandered near them in this way or if they inadvertently heard a 
brahmin chanting some ritual verses.
10 . Page 271 – hunt-the-coral-flower in the Nandana Grove – The Coral 
Tree, as mentioned in The Pilgrim Kamanita, pp 142ff, blossoms only rarely, 
taking one hundred years to flower, (see Three Worlds According to King Ruang, 
p 234).

389
11 . Page 271 – the dovey-darlings of Nandana –The Nandana Grove, 
‘Garden of Delight’ is one of the parks in the capital of The Heaven of the 
Thirty-Three Gods. The apsaras referred to here as ‘dovey-darlings’ and 
‘feather-feet’ are the ‘nymphs with dove-like feet’ who were one group of 
apsaras of that heaven. See for example, Ud 3.2. In Pali they are called acchara 
kakutapadani .
12 . Page 273 – Their agreement was voiced by their roaring silence – 
Consent by silence is the customary method employed the Buddha and by 
those who follow Buddhist traditions, for example: ‘“Venerable Sir, let the 
Blessed One with three others consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.” 
The Blessed One consented in silence .’ (M 58 .4) .
13 . Page 274 – My niece is an only child – This account is derived from two 
places in the Dhammapada Commentary, to verses Dhp 179-80 and Dhp 2123; see The Story Cycle of King Udena. These passages are to be found in Buddhist 
Legends, Vol I, pp 274-77 and Vol III, pp 31-35. 
14 . Page 276 – you honour the Tathagata to think of him as the best of 
men – The word ‘tathagata’ was apparently coined by the Buddha, and is used 
to refer to himself. It means ‘One gone to Suchness, come to Suchness’.
Chapter 22 
1 . Page 280 – She reviewed the knotty points of the teaching – This 
reflects an important aspect of Buddhist practice: ‘Here one who has faith 
in a teacher visits them; when one visits them, one pays respects to them; 
when one pays respects to them one gives ear; one who give ear hears the 
Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma one memorises it; one examines the 
meaning of the teachings one has memorized; when one examines the 
meaning, one gains reflective acceptance of those teachings; when one has 
gained a reflective acceptance of those teachings, zeal springs up within one; 
when zeal has sprung up, one applies will; having applied one’s will, one 
scrutinizes; having scrutinized, one strives; resolutely striving, one realizes 
with the body the Ultimate Truth and sees it by penetrating it with wisdom.’ 
(M 70 .23) .
2 . Page 280 – A warm feeling of pure love … she nursed it – One of the 
ways of developing loving-kindness meditation is to deliberately bring to 
mind a person (or even an animal) for whom or which one has a deep and 
unquestioning affection, then taking that benevolent feeling, nurturing it 
and extending it to others.
3 . Page 281 – In the land of my fathers – This is the name of a much-loved 
song of the Welsh, which is also now the national anthem of that country. 
Its title in Welsh is Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau; it was written by Evan James and his 
son James James.
4 . Page 281 – it is our custom to mark our limbs – The Celts of ancient times 
were famous for being heavily tattooed. Julius Cæsar described these bodymarkings in Book V of his history, The Gallic Wars, in 54 BCE .
5 . Page 281 – beside the inland sea in … Parthia – This is the Caspian Sea of 
modern times and the lands to its east.
6 . Page 281 – an aged warlord in Maracanda – This is the ancient name for 
Samarkand, as mentioned above in Ch 21, note 4. 
7 . Page 281 – the enfolding serpent – the Ouroboros – It is an ancient 
European myth that the world is in fact flat, and coiled around its rim lies 
a vast snake, the Ouroboros, or Jörmungandr, with its tail held in its own 
mouth.
8 . Page 281 – the Land of the Five Rivers – This is the Punjab of modern 
times, comprised of parts of north-west India and eastern Pakistan. The 
number five, pañca, gave the region its name; the five rivers are the Sutlej, 
Beas, Ravi, Chenab and Jhelum.
9 . Page 281 – the heart of the Middle Country – This is the Majjhena Padesa 
in Pali, otherwise known as the central area of the River Ganges basin. It 
roughly comprises the modern states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. In the 
Buddha’s time it stretched from Rajagaha in the east to Madhura in the west, 
and from Gaya in the south to Savatthi in the north.
10 . Page 282 – the land of Cymru – This is the modern day spelling of ‘Wales’ 
in Welsh. The word is pronounced ‘Kumri’.
11 . Page 282 – she kept the flame of loving-kindness bright – As 
mentioned in note 2 to this chapter, which describes the classic way in which 
that practice is carried out. 
12 . Page 283 – but none of my efforts has borne fruit – This complaint of 
Magandiya to her uncle expresses her thoughts as found in The Story Cycle of 
King Udena, in Buddhist Legends Vol I, p 288. 
13 . Page 285 – no villages in this valley until … its eastern end – These are 
the modern-day villages of Kalgar, Tulgar and Pulgar.
14 . Page 290 – The pillars … are thoroughly dried out – This passage is as 
found in The Story Cycle of King Udena in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 288. 
Chapter 23
1 . Page 293 – yantras in some old language – A yantra is a symbolic pattern 
or matrix of letters and numbers, used since ancient times in India and 
South-East Asia to act as a protective charm or bestow particular powers 
or enchantments. Yantras are also used as meditation objects or a symbol of 
spiritual truths, for example, the Sri-yantra .
2 . Page 294 – the celestial River Sarasvati – The Milky Way is also known 
by this name, and is believed in Hindu myths to meet the other earthly rivers 
at this point. The modern day city of Allahabad, also known as Prayag or 
Payaga, lies at this junction too.
3 . Page 296 – That Vajrapani yakkha knocked me dizzy – A yakkha of this 
name appears from time to time in the Buddhist scriptures, as mentioned 
above at Ch 15, note 6, re p 168.
It is interesting that in the Northern Buddhist tradition there is also a 
Bodhisattva of the same name. I.B. Horner has some interesting comments 
on this character in Middle Length Sayings Vol I, p 185, as do Maurice Walshe 
in note 151 to his Long Discourses of the Buddha, p 549, and D.L. Snellgrove 
in Buddhist Himalaya, p 62.
4 . Page 301 – sick-hearted pretas – Preta in Sanskrit or peta in Pali are 
the ‘hungry ghosts’, members of one of the lowest realms in Buddhist 
cosmology. They are miserable beings in a perpetual state of craving, as 
they have enormous ever-hungry bellies but tiny mouths, and can never eat 
enough to make themselves satisfied. The Petavatthu collection in the Pali 
Canon contains many stories about them. They symbolize the realm of the 
addict who is always hungry for the next fix.
5 . Page 304 – Just as the moon’s radiance – These passages are adapted 
from Iti 27.
6 . Page 305 – Even if bandits were to sever you savagely limb from limb – 
This is the Buddha’s famous ‘Simile of the Saw’, in which he gave an example 
of how central the practice of loving-kindness is to the spiritual life. This 
passage is found in the Kakacupama Sutta (‘The Discourse on the Simile of 
the Saw’) at M 21 .20 .
7 . Page 306 – held by two kinds of views – These passages are adapted from 
Iti 49 .
8 . Pages 307 – hopping the weirs in serpenthyme – Some of the words and 
phrases of this night-long riverrun have been borrowed from Finnegans Wake, 
by James Joyce, (pp 194-216), evoking the nature of the river spirit Anna Livia 
Plurabelle.
9 . Page 308 – dawn over Kurukshetra – This is the field of battle in the 
classic Indian epic the Mahabharata. It is up-river from Kosambi on the River 
Yamuna.
Chapter 24
1 . Page 311 – how can he be rewarding her – The account of Udena’s 
rewarding of Magandiya can be found in The Story Cycle of King Udena in 
Buddhist Legends, Vol I, pp 289-90. 
2 . Page 312 – in a roasting chamber like the Avici Hell – This is the lowest 
of the ‘Eight Great Hells’ of Buddhist cosmology; its name means ‘the great 
hell of suffering without respite’. Each of the eight great hells is described as 
having floors and ceilings made of fiery red iron: ‘The fire in these hells never 
goes out.’ (See for example Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp 66-8).
3 . Page 314 – until this moment … I always felt apprehensive and 
suspicious of Samavati – As in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 290.
4 . Page 315 – as friendly and undisputing as milk with water – This 
beautiful phrase was originally used by the Buddha to address a group of 
three bhikkhus whom he met just after he had left the squabbling monks 
at Ghositarama behind him. The story is found at M 128.11 and MV 10.4. 
The Venerable Anuruddha explains that one factor contributing to their 
harmonious state is that he considers: ‘Why should I not set aside what I wish

390
to do and rather do what the other venerable ones wish to do?’ And so he 
does; thus concord is developed.
5 . Page 316 – the ‘soma-charm’ I put on the oil – While the Gandhara charm 
and the cintamani both come from the Pali Canon; this charm is a fiction. That 
said, Soma was both the deity of the sacrifice in the ancient Vedas – there 
are 120 hymns to Soma in the Rig Veda – and also the liquor of the sacrifice 
that is poured into the mouth of Agni, the fire god. Soma was also a kind of 
universal panacea that caused the one who drank it to feel euphoria and a 
great sense of well-being: 
We have drunk Soma; we have become immortal.
We have gone to the light; we have found the gods.
What can hostility do to us now? 
Rig Veda VIII 48 .3, in Oriental Mythology by Joseph Campbell, p 181.
6 . Page 319 – Hiri and Siri, ‘Honour’ and ‘Glory’, were of the Kalakanjaasura type – This subgroup of asuras is mentioned at D 20.12: ‘The Kalakanjas, 
terrible to see’ and at D 24.1.7: ‘the Kalakanja asuras, who are the very lowest 
grade of asuras. The other aspects of their physical characteristics can mostly 
be found in Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp 107-08. These daughters 
of Indra and Suja are mentioned along with Asa and Saddha in Jat §535, 
where they compete for a Coral Flower. This is a contest reminiscent of that 
occasioned by the ‘apple of discord’ which became the catalyst for the Trojan 
War. In this myth the shepherd Paris had to choose which of the goddesses 
Hera, Athene and Aphrodite should be given the golden apple inscribed with 
the words ‘for the most beautiful’. Similarly, in Jat §382 a beautiful apsara 
called Siri is involved in a comparable contest with Kalakanni, a female naga, 
who is referred to as being ‘ungracious and unlovely’. 
NB: in the Jataka the daughters of Indra and Suja are referred to as: ‘Four 
maids with skins like gold … peerless midst all nymphs’, i.e. the description of 
Hiri and Siri as being ‘Kalakanja-like’ in this way is not canonical.
7 . Page 319 – She was fair and golden-skinned – Suja is described thus in 
Buddhist Legends Vol I, p 323.
8 . Page 319 – looking like Kalakanni, ‘Misfortune’, herself – As above, Jat 
§382.
9 . Page 321 – the force of life itself – the jivita – In Buddhist philosophy 
this is the word for the ‘life-’ or ‘vitality-faculty’; it can be physical (rupajivitindriya) or mental (nama- jivitindriya) .
10 . Page 322 – The asura was still bound – These properties of the bondage 
of Vepacitti are described at S 35.248, with the added reflection of the 
Buddha: ‘So subtle, bhikkhus, was the bondage of Vepacitti, but even subtler 
than that is the bondage of Mara.’ (See above, Ch 8, note 5).
11 . Page 322 – He cursed those who stood in judgement over him – This 
passage is derived from S 11.4, as are the verses that follow.
12 . Page 323 – I know you, Evil One, you have come here for your own 
ends – This phrase is borrowed from SN 430, the Padhana Sutta.
13 . Page 325 – Full six hundred generations – This poem is based on accounts 
of the extinction of over fifty species of mega-fauna in continental America 
between around 12,000 and 11,000 BCE. After the arrival of the first small 
group of humans – who crossed the Canadian ice-sheet and emerged near 
modern-day Edmonton, also in about 12,000 BCE – within roughly 1,000 
years, these dozens of species of large mammals had expired. 
Their demise also appears to have coincided with a change in religious 
practices (as evidenced by ritual objects and the structure of burial sites), 
and with a new ‘earth-respecting’ ethic which appeared then for the first 
time.
Chapter 25
1 . Page 334 – This revealed holes that had been neatly dug – This whole 
scenario is largely as described in the Dhammapada Commentary; see 
Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 290.
2 . Page 335 – Your karma … is ripening – The Buddha uses this kind of 
phrase often, for example at M 86.17, in the Angulimala Sutta: ‘You are 
experiencing here and now the result of deeds because of which you might 
have been tortured in hell for many years.’ And more generally: ‘Beings are 
the owners of their actions, heirs of their actions, they originate from their 
actions, are bound to their actions, abide supported by their actions.’ (M 
135 .4) .
3 . Page 335 – The state executioner … Tambadathika  – He was indeed 
a ruthless bandit, described as having ‘copper-coloured teeth and tawny 
skin, his body covered with scars.’ He was the executioner in Rajagaha for 
fifty-five years, but when he died – killed by the same cow as Pukkusati, it 
seems – he was reborn in the Tusita Heaven, as he had just heard a Dhamma 
talk given by Venerable Sariputta. See also The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch 21, note 
2 (re p 126). His story can be found in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp 218-21, 
commentary to Dhp 100. 
4 . Page 336 – The executioner began to slice – This gruesome passage 
is directly from the Dhammapada Commentary; see Buddhist Legends Vol 
I, p 290. The Pali for this reads: ‘Magandiyaya sariratopi tikhinena satthena 
ghanaghanatthanesu mamsam uppatetva telakapalam uddhanam aropetva puve 
pacapetva tameva khadapesi.’ This is translated as: ‘As for Magandiya, he had 
pieces of solid flesh ripped from various parts of her body with a sharp knife 
and, setting a vessel of oil on the brazier, he had them fried like cakes and 
made her eat them.’ (E.W. Burlingame trans.).
5 . Page 345 – a full-scale glamour is far superior – The original meaning 
of the word ‘glamour’ involved casting an enchantment in order to make 
someone look different. For example, the grey-eyed goddess Athene casts 
a glamour over Odysseus when he arrives in Ithaca, to protect him from 
the aggression of his wife’s suitors: ‘Let me make you so that no mortal can 
recognize you.’ (Odyssey, Bk XIII, l 397) . 
6 . Page 345 – she performed the healing mudras – A mudra is a gesture 
made with the hands that symbolizes or embodies various spiritual qualities. 
These include, for example, teaching, blessing, peacefulness, fearlessness or, 
as in the famous ‘earth-witness’ mudra of the Buddha (where his right hand 
reaches down to touch the earth), the very moment of his enlightenment. 
Chapter 26
1 . Page 347 – the few who possessed the deva-eye – This is the dibba-cakkhu 
or divine eye; it means the ability to see into other realms of existence. It is 
one of the six abhinya or higher powers, psychic abilities that may arise as 
the result of meditation practice and a natural propensity for such skills. The 
other powers are: 1) magical abilities, like flying through the air; 2) the divine 
ear, i.e. being able to hear things a long distance away; 3) reading another 
person’s thoughts; 4) memory of past lives; and 5) full enlightenment. These 
are all mentioned in many places in the Pali Canon, for example at D 34.1.7 
and M 77.31-38.
2 . Page 349 – I hope you have been keeping well, bhikkhus – This is a very 
customary manner of greeting. For example, see M 128.7.
3 . Page 349 – came to the forest of Parileyyaka – This account can be found 
in various versions at Ud 4.5, S 22.81, M 128, and in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, p 
179ff, and Vol III, p 211.
4 . Page 349 – an ancient sala-tree – The sala tree is shorea rubusta (also vatica 
robusta), known for its beautiful fragrant white blossoms. 
5 . Page 350 – they took the opportunity to ask forgiveness – This 
ceremony is regularly practised in southern Buddhist countries. It is carried 
out when one is about to depart from a monastery, at the end of a time when 
one has been living close to others for an extended period or at times such 
as described in this incident, when it will be useful to clean the slate and 
acknowledge any hurt that might have been caused.
6 . Page 350 – Those who are heedless – These passages and the 
accompanying verses are derived from the Dhammapada Commentary to 
Dhp 21-23, in Buddhist Legends Vol I, p 293. The verses themselves are Dhp 
21-23. 
The Pali for ‘For, bhikkhus, the mindful never die,’ is Na hi, bhikkhave, 
appamatta na miyanti. 
7 . Page 351 – It doesn’t seem right – This account of the past life of Samavati 
is found in Buddhist Legends Vol I, pp 290-1.
8 . Page 352 – Some of those good women were stream-enterers, some 
once-returners, some non-returners – This passage is from Ud 7.10.
9 . Page 353 – a katthamukha, a “wooden-mouth” viper – This type of 
snake with its paralyzing bite is mentioned in note 173 to S 35.238, in The 
Connected Discourses, p 1423. It is uncertain which species of snake this 
might refer to today.
10 . Page 353 – I’m not supposed to be ’ere in this part of the monastery 
– In Buddhist monasteries a man would not be allowed to wander by himself 
around the nuns’ area, and similarly, a woman should not be by herself in 
the men’s area.
11 . Page 355 – the blessed Sanat Kumara himself – This is a reference to 
the brahma god known as the Eternal Youth on account of his ever-young 
appearance. He is one of the very few brahma deities who follow the 
Buddha’s teachings. He is mentioned, for example, at S 6.11, D 18.17-29 and 
M 53.25, and his words are often praised by the Buddha.

391
He is also seemingly related to the modern day avatar called Babaji or 
Haidakhan Baba, of the Himalayan foothills in Kumaon, who manifested in 
a cave as a fifteen-year-old youth and lived from 1970-84; his ashram is still 
much-visited today.
12 . Page 355 – He wrote in runes of flame – The Celts of Wales carved 
inscriptions in a runic alphabet.
13 . Page 355 – Merely turn your hearing round … to listen to your 
genuine true nature – This is the method of meditation described by the 
Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara (Guan Shi Yin) in the Surangama Sutra, Ch 3 
(see p 256 of the BTTS ed., 2009). It is named by the Buddha as the ‘easiest 
way to reach enlightenment’ among those described to him by the twentyfive Bodhisattvas who visit him in that particular teaching. 
14 . Page 359 – a smoky, dolorous haze – This description is derived from 
the Buddha’s words after the passing away of Vakkali in S 22.87.
15 . Page 359 – I ate the bait and now depart – These are the words of the 
enlightened monk Ratthapala, uttered at M 82.25, after his family had tried 
to tempt him back to the household life.
16 . Page 359 – No bribe can move relentless Death – This verse appears 
in Jat §521.
17 . Page 361 – the elder Uppalavanna … Sister Khema – These two were 
recognized by the Buddha as foremost in spiritual power and wisdom 
respectively. In one of his teachings (at S 17.24) the Buddha states: ‘A faithful 
female lay follower, rightly imploring her only daughter, dear and beloved, 
might implore her thus: “Dear, you should become like Khujjuttara the lay 
follower and Velukandakiya, Nanda’s mother … for they are the standard 
and criterion for my female lay disciples … But if, dear, you go forth from the 
household life into homelessness, you should become like the bhikkhunis 
Khema and Uppalavanna – for they are the standard and criterion for my 
female disciples who are bhikkhunis.’
Nanda’s mother, also known as Uttara, was the foremost of meditators, 
just as Khujjuttara was the foremost in those who have learned much.
18 . Page 361 – in order to be back at our monastery before dusk – 
Bhikkhunis have a principle of not being away from their dwelling place 
after dark.
19 . Page 361 – bolts of cloth, flasks of medicine of various kinds, incense, 
candles and garlands of many sorts of flowers – These are among the 
most common traditional offerings: cloth to make robes, medicine for 
illness and the three types of shrine offering. These latter are often held 
to symbolize: 1) flowers = virtue, 2) incense = concentration, and 3) candles 
= wisdom.
20 . Page 362 – Queen Samavati, was foremost of those who live in 
kindness – The Buddha bestowed the title, aggam metta-viharinam on 
Samavati; as mentioned at A 1.14.7.
21 . Page 362 – you surpassed all others … in learning and expounding – 
This epithet bestowed by the Buddha is aggam bahussutanam in Pali .
22 . Page 362 – one in the lineage of the Tathagatas – Meaning in this 
instance that Dusaka is a Bodhisattva, one resolved on being a Buddha.
23 . Page 362 – she became one of the non-returners – This is the third of 
the four levels of enlightenment. The name anagami, literally ‘non-returner’, 
means that one who has reached such a level will never be reborn in the 
human realm, but only in what are called the Pure Abodes (Suddhavasa) . All 
the inhabitants of those realms are thus either non-returners or Arahants. 
The Pure Abodes are considered to be the five highest of the brahma 
heavens in what is termed The Realm of Form. See also The Pilgrim Kamanita, 
Ch 3, note 8 and Ch 8, note 5 .
24 . Page 362 – just as were Ghatikara and Pukkusati – Ghatikara was 
a potter in the lifetime of the Buddha Kassapa and was a friend of the 
Bodhisattva Gotama, known in that life as Jotipala; his story is found at M 
81 and S 1.50. Pukkusati was the original model for Karl Gjellerup’s chief 
protagonist Kamanita in The Pilgrim Kamanita. His story is found at M 140, 
and he is also mentioned at S 1.50.
25 . Page 362 – there will be only one book – This is the Itivuttaka, a section 
of the Khuddaka-nikāya, the fifth of the collections that make up the 
Buddha’s discourses.
26 . Page 363 – In the same royal household – This account derives from the 
Dhammapada Commentary in Buddhist Legends Vol I, p 292.
27 . Page 363 – Not in the sky – This is Dhp verse 127.
28 . Page 364 – Do you have your parents’ permission? – The need for 
parental approval was established at the request of the Buddha’s father, 
after the Buddha gave his own son, Rahula, the novice ordination when 
he was seven years old. The aged king had become very attached to his 
grandson and felt he should have been asked before Rahula was made a 
samanera. The account of this is found at MV 1.54, and is quoted in The Life of 
the Buddha by Bhikkhu Nyanamoli, pp 77-9, BPS.
29 . Page 365 – the ‘taking of dependence’ – This is the formal commitment 
of the student to follow the advice of a particular teacher during the years of 
monastic apprenticeship. This commitment lasts throughout one’s time as a 
novice and for at least the first five years as a monk.
30 . Page is 365 – the memorious and eloquent – Not only were the 
Venerable Ananda’s teachings always well received (see Ch 21, note 1, re 
p 263), but he was blessed with total recall. At the First Council after the 
Buddha’s final passing away, he was the one who recited all the Buddha’s 
teachings from memory.
31 . Page 365 – Thus have I heard – The Mangala Sutta or Discourse on the 
Highest Blessings is found at SN 258-69. It is one of the most frequently 
recited teachings of the Buddha, both because of the comprehensive 
collection of good advice that it contains and because it is part of the paritta 
or protective verses recited for blessing and healing ceremonies.
32 . Page 366 – The Sudhamma Hall – This was the main throne-room of the 
Vejayanta Palace, as mentioned at S 35.248, for example. It is described in 
detail at Buddhist Legends, Vol I, pp 319-20.
33 . Page 367 – the Thirty-Three Gods themselves – The story of the 
provenance of the group of gods who gave their name to the heavenly realm 
is found in Buddhist Legends, Vol I, pp 315-20.
34 . Page 367 – a dumb animal like her – In Jat §481 a king, frustrated that 
a pair of captured kinnaris will not sing and dance for him, demands: ‘Kill 
these creatures, and cook them, and serve them up to me.’ From The Jataka, 
Vol IV, p 159.
35 . Page 370 – ceremonies of lamentation – Kinnaris are capable of 
experiencing great sorrow. In Jat §504 there is an account of a pair of 
kinnaris who weep for 700 years after having been separated for one night. 
These two beings became King Pasenadi and Queen Mallika in the Buddha’s 
lifetime. Also, as mentioned above in Ch 15, note 13, in Jat §485 the kinnari 
Canda’s cries of grief for her mortally wounded husband reach all the way 
to Indra’s throne, making it hot and causing him to revive the Bodhisattva.
36 . Page 371 – doing some walking meditation – In the usual standards 
of meditation monasteries, there is encouragement to do some walking 
meditation – usually for at least an hour – after the daily meal, for example: 
‘After the meal, air your robe on the line, and get straight out on to the 
walking meditation path.’ The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah, p 258.
37 . Page 372 – the story about the disaster at Vesali – This refers to the 
origin story for the third of the parajika or ‘defeat rules’ for Buddhist monks 
and nuns. After this incident the Buddha established the training precept 
that: ‘Should any bhikkhu intentionally deprive a human being of life, or 
search for an assassin for him, or praise the advantages of death, or incite 
him to die (saying): “My good man, what use is this evil, miserable life to 
you? Death would be better for you than life,” or with such an idea in mind, 
such a purpose in mind, should in various ways praise the advantages of 
death or incite him to die, he also is defeated and no longer in affiliation.’ 
That is to say, if a monk or nun kills someone or causes another person to 
kill someone, their monastic life is automatically terminated – they have 
been ‘defeated’ by Mara and they can never be fully ordained again in this 
lifetime.
38 . Page 373 – The Yonakas call it “hamartia” – Yonaka is the Pali word for 
the Greeks; it is similar to the English word Ionia, referring to western Asia 
Minor . The Greek word is Ionios. As for hamartia itself, it is well represented 
in the Buddhist scriptures by the jealousy of the Buddha’s cousin, Devadatta, 
and by the ambition of King Ajatasattu. As the Buddha expressed it, after 
having given the wonderfully comprehensive ‘Discourse on the Fruits of the 
Homeless Life’ to the latter: ‘The King is done for, his fate is sealed, bhikkhus. 
But if the King had not deprived his father, that good man and just king, 
of his life, then as he sat here the pure and spotless vision of the Dhamma 
would have arisen in him,’ (D 2.102). Instead Ajatasattu was bound for a stint 
in the lowest hells . 
Hamartia has also been a frequent theme of tragic drama, from Œdipus 
the King by Sophocles, to Macbeth by Shakespeare, to A Streetcar Named Desire 
by Tennessee Williams, and it resonates loudly in the character of Lord 
Voldemort in the Harry Potter stories.

392
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. – The Connected Discourses of the 
Buddha: A Translation of the Samyutta-Nikaya, Wisdom 
Publications, 1999.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. – The Numerical Discourses of the 
Buddha: A Translation of the Anguttara-Nikaya, Wisdom 
Publications, 2012.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. – The Suttanipata: An Ancient 
Collection of the Buddha’s Discourses, Together with its 
Commentaries, Wisdom Publications, 2017.
Bowker, John, ed. – The Oxford Dictionary of World Religions, 
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Buddhist Text Translation Society – The Shurangama Sutra 
– A New Translation, BTTS/DRBU, 2009.
Burlingame, E.W., trans. – Buddhist Legends – Translated from 
the Original Pali Text of the Dhammapada Commentary, 3 vols ., 
(Harvard Oriental Series, Vols. 28-30), Harvard University 
Press, 1921 . 
Campbell, Joseph – The Masks of God: Oriental Mythology, 
Viking, 1962 .
Campbell, Joseph and Henry Morton Robinson – A Skeleton 
Key to Finnegans Wake, Harcourt Brace, 1944.
Carus, Paul – The Gospel of Buddha: Complied from Ancient 
Records, The Open Court Publishing Company, 1894.
Chah, Ajahn – The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah, Aruno 
Publications, 2011.
Chanting, Volume 1: Morning and Evening Chanting and 
Reflections, Amaravati Publications, 2015.
Chanting, Volume 2: Suttas, Parittas and Funeral Chanting, 
Amaravati Publications, 2015.
Cowell, E .B ., ed . – The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha’s Former 
Births, 6 vols., Pali Text Society (PTS), 1895.
Dowman, Keith trans. and Robert Beer illus. – Masters of 
Enchantment – The Lives and Legends of the Mahasiddhas, 
Inner Traditions, 1989 .
Gjellerup, K. – The Pilgrim Kamanita – a Legendary Romance, 
(1st German edn. 1906); Amaro Bhikkhu ed., Amaravati 
Publications, (2nd English edn.) 2017.
Horner, I .B ., trans . – Middle Length Sayings, 3 vols ., PTS, 
1954-59.
Ireland, John D. trans. – Udana and the Itivuttaka: Two Classics 
from the Pali Canon, Buddhist Publication Society, 1998.
 Joyce, James – Finnegans Wake, Faber and Faber, 1939.
Mahā Boowa Ñānasampanno, Ācariya – Venerable Ācariya 
Mun Bhūridatta Thera – A Spiritual Biography, trans. by 
Bhikkhu Dick Sīlaratano, Forest Dhamma Publications, 
2010 .
Malalasekera, G .P . – Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, (PTS), 
1938 . 
Mehta, Gita – Raj, Jonathan Cape, 1989.
Milton, John – Paradise Lost, (1st edn. 1667), Penguin 
Classics 2003 .
Nyanamoli, Bhikkhu – The Life of the Buddha – As it Appears 
in the Pali Canon, the Oldest Authentic Record, Buddhist 
Publication Society, 1972.
Nyanamoli, Bhikkhu, and Bhikkhu Bodhi, trans. – The 
Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the 
Majjhima-Nikaya, Wisdom Publications, 1995.
Oppenheimer, Stephen – Out of Eden: The Peopling of the 
World, Robinson, 2004.
Oppenheimer, Stephen – The Real Eve: Modern Man’s Journey 
Out of Africa, Carroll & Graf Publishers, 2003.
Reynolds, Frank E . and Mani B ., trans . – Three Worlds 
According to King Ruang: A Thai Buddhist Cosmology, Asian 
Humanities Press, 1982.
Sumedho, Ajahn – Mindfulness: The Path to the Deathless, 
Amaravati Publications, 1985. 
Tzu, Lao – Tao Te Ching, trans. by Stephen Mitchell, 
HarperCollins, 1988.
Walshe, M . O’C . trans . – The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A 
Translation of the Digha-Nikaya, Wisdom Publications, 1987.
Wells, Spencer – The Journey of Man: A Genetic Odyssey, Allen 
Lane, The Penguin Press, 2002.
Xueqin, Cao – The Story of the Stone: a Chinese Novel, 5 vols ., 
trans. by David Hawkes, Penguin Classics, 1973. 
ABBREVIATIONS
D: Digha Nikaya, The Long Discourses of the Buddha.
M: Majjhima Nikaya, The Middle Length Discourses of the 
Buddha.
A: Anguttara Nikaya, The Discourses Related by Numbers.
S: Samyutta Nikaya, The Discourses Related by Subject.
SN: Sutta Nipata, A collection of the Buddha’s teachings, in 
verse form.
Dhp: Dhammapada, A collection of the Buddha’s teachings, 
in verse form.
Iti: Itivuttaka, Sayings of the Buddha.
Ud: Udana, Inspired Utterances.
MV: Mahavagga, The Great Chapter, from the books of 
monastic discipline.
CV: Culavagga, The Lesser Chapter, from the books of 
monastic discipline.
Thig: Therigatha, The Verses of the Elder Nuns.
ThagA: Commentary to the Theragatha, The Verses of the 
Elder Monks .
Jat: Jataka, The Stories of the Buddha’s Previous Births.
Vin: Suttavibhanga, the comprehensive analysis of the 
Monastic Rule or Vinaya, from the books of the monastic 
discipline.

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the
license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material
in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as
publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.
AJAHN AMARO
THIS BOOK  IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIB UTION, PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK.
ALSO AVAILABLE FOR FREE DOWNLOAD FROM:
WWW.AMARAVATI.ORG
IF YOU ARE INTERESTED IN TRANSLATING THIS TEXT INTO ANOTHER LANGUAGE,
PLEASE CONTACT US AT PUBLICATIONS AMARAVATI.ORG
2019 © A 2 PUBLICATIONS
COVER IMAGES AND ILLUSTRATIONS: FRANCES QUAIL
MAPS, ILLUMINATED CAPITALS AND CHAPTER END GRAPHIC: AJAHN AMARO
COVER AND PAGE DESIGN AND FORMATTING:
NICHOLAS HALLIDAY • HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT
HTTP://CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND/4.0/
SEE BELOW FOR MORE DETAILS ON YOUR
RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS UNDER THIS LICENSE
THIS EDITION • 3,000 COPIES PRINTED IN THE UK, 2019
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0
INTERNATIONAL LICENSE.
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT
HTTP://CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND/4.0/
YOU ARE FREE TO:
COPY AND REDISTRIBUTE THE MATERIAL IN ANY MEDIUM OR FORMAT
THE LICENSOR CANNOT REVOKE THESE FREEDOMS AS LONG AS YOU FOLLOW THE LICENSE TERMS.
UNDER THE FOLLOWING TERMS:
ATTRIBUTION: YOU MUST GIVE APPROPRIATE CREDIT, PROVIDE A LINK TO THE LICENSE,
AND INDICATE IF CHANGES WERE MADE. YOU MAY DO SO IN ANY REASONABLE MANNER,
BUT NOT IN ANY WAY THAT SUGGESTS THE LICENSOR ENDORSES YOU OR YOUR USE.
NON-COMMERCIAL: YOU MAY NOT USE THE MATERIAL FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
NO DERIVATIVES: IF YOU REMIX, TRANSFORM, OR BUILD UPON THE MATERIAL,
YOU MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE THE MODIFIED MATERIAL.
NO ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS: YOU MAY NOT APPLY
LEGAL TERMS OR TECHNOLOGICAL MEASURES THAT LEGALLY RESTRICT
OTHERS FROM DOING ANYTHING THE LICENSE PERMITS.
NOTICES:
YOU DO NOT HAVE TO COMPLY WITH THE
LICENSE FOR ELEMENTS OF THE MATERIAL IN THE
PUBLIC DOMAIN OR WHERE YOUR USE IS PERMITTED
BY AN APPLICABLE EXCEPTION OR LIMITATION.
NO WARRANTIES ARE GIVEN. THE LICENSE MAY NOT GIVE YOU ALL OF THE
PERMISSIONS NECESSARY FOR YOUR INTENDED USE. FOR EXAMPLE, OTHER RIGHTS SUCH
AS PUBLICITY, PRIVACY, OR MORAL RIGHTS MAY LIMIT HOW YOU USE THE MATERIAL.
