# Chapter 1

Reality







HAPPILY EVER AFTER
REFLECTIONS ON LIFE GOALS AND PRIORITIES
Reality
VOLUME
ONE







PAGE
7 1
‘THE BLUE PILL OR THE RED PILL?
WHY WAKE UP WHEN MY HABITS ARE SO PLEASANT?’
A Sunday Afternoon Talk, given at Amaravati, summer 2017
PAGE
39 2
‘OF COURSE IT’S HAPPENING IN YOUR HEAD, HARRY , BUT
WHY ON EARTH SHOULD THAT MEAN THAT IT IS NOT REAL?’
A Sunday Afternoon Talk, given at Amaravati, summer 2018
PAGE
69 3
LET THE CITTA DRAW A PICTURE
A Sunday Afternoon Talk, given at Amaravati, summer 2019

Contents
These pages will be formatted when the book is signed off.

‘The Blue Pill or the Red Pill?
Why Wake up When my Habits
are so Pleasant?’  
For some readers this may be a very obscure title while for others, who 
have seen the film The Matrix or at least heard of it, it will make a bit more 
sense. The plot revolves around a hero, Neo, discovering that rather than 
life being a situation of free will and independence and enjoyment, it is just 
a façade. He discovers that the life that he thinks he is leading is an illusion 
and that, in fact, his body is kept in a small plastic pod, like all other human 
beings, suspended in fluid surrounded by pipes and wires, and the mental 
energy that they produce in their little flotation tank is what is powering 
the great artificial intelligence that is now running the planet.
The Matrix is the computer program that runs it and organises the collective 
illusion so that all of the living beings assume they are driving to work 
and chatting with their family and having breakfast and life is comfortable, 
predictable and reliably pleasant. It becomes revealed to the hero along 
the way that this is an illusion and the mentor, whose name is Morpheus, 
presents the hero Neo with a choice: the blue pill or the red pill. If you

8
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
take the blue pill, it means your mind will continue to be absorbed in the 
delusion. You will carry on, somewhat happily, with your delusion of having 
free will, being able to walk around and live your life in a deluded state. If 
you take the red pill; you will wake up to what has actually been happening. 
He takes the red pill and then realizes, ‘Oh my goodness, I spent my whole 
life in this little flotation tank. I’ve never actually been anywhere. I was 
just suspended in fluids, surrounded by wires and tubes, and the whole 
of my life, the idea of being an independent person, making choices and 
doing what I like has been totally delusory. It’s all been an illusion.’ This has 
become a metaphor in our culture: do you take the blue pill and stay asleep, 
or do you take the red pill and wake up to rude reality?
There is a very impactful moment when the hero wakes up from the delusion, 
he breaks free of the influence of The Matrix and then his mentor introduces 
him to the world as it actually is, and it’s pretty grim. Even though he has 
escaped the flotation tank, it is still a desolate, post-apocalyptic world run 
by artificial intelligence. His mentor and the little enclave of noble warriors 
who are battling the evil empire of the artificial intelligence are trying to be 
the torch bearers for freedom. His mentor, at that moment of him waking 
up to where they are and how life actually is, says to him, ‘Welcome to the 
desert of the real.’ It’s a bit of a shock, but it is also reality. I feel there is a 
useful message in this.

9
REALITY
The blue pill or the red pill? Do we want to carry on in our deluded state 
based on our habits of self-view and our opinions, our preferences, our 
familiar way of seeing ourselves and the world, or do we want to wake up? 
Do we want to try seeing life through the eyes of Dhamma to make our 
way through the desert of the real? I feel this is the kind of question that 
many of us face during the course of a day: do I choose to buy into my selfcentred views, my opinions, my habits, or do I choose to take a different 
perspective? Do I choose to let go of those habits?
There is also the question: why do we have to take a pill, why do we have 
to choose? The Buddha was the doctor of the world. If we didn’t need 
medicine, life would be great. But this is where we’re at, we’re not blissfully 
happy all the time. That was the starting point for the Buddha. In fact, his 
first inclination was to not even try teaching humanity because he thought 
all beings were beyond saving. It’s said that after the Enlightenment, he 
cast his vision around the world and his first thought was that the beings of 
the world are so completely intoxicated and lost in their own bubbles, that 
they were beyond saving. It was only when the Brahmā deity, Sahampati, 
went to the Buddha and said, ‘It’s true that beings are lost. There are many, 
many beings who are caught up in delusion. However, there are beings with 
a lot of dust in their eyes and beings with just a little bit of dust in their 
eyes. And so, for the sake of those with just a little dust in their eyes, please 
teach the Dhamma that you understand.’

10
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
When the Buddha first started teaching, he approached it like a medical 
diagnosis for a spiritual disease. It was a treatment for the malaise of
dukkha, the fact that we are less than blissfully happy all the  time. The 
Buddha created a fourfold spiritual diagnosis, the Four Noble Truths:  
dukkha is the symptom; self-centred craving is the cause of the malaise; 
the cessation of dukkha is the prognosis and the Noble Eightfold Path is the 
treatment – the latter being the equivalent of taking the red pill.
•  •  •  
The Buddha said, ‘When we talk about the world, what is the world? That 
whereby one is a perceiver of the world, and a conceiver of the world, that 
is called “the world” in this Dhamma and discipline’ (S 35.116). The world, in 
this respect, is thus not the planet or the physical universe so much as our 
perception of the world, inner and outer. As he points out in that teaching, 
‘What is it whereby one is a perceiver of the world and a conceiver of the 
world? The eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, the mind; those are 
the means whereby one is a perceiver of the world and a conceiver of the 
world.’ The world is the world of our own experience. 
We can take something like colour. When you see a colour, you say, ‘This is a 
blue carpet.’ That is how you perceive the carpet, do other people perceive it 
in the same way? What do other people see? You can also take a sound. When

11
REALITY
you hear a magpie calling, you may think it is meaningless, or nothing more 
than a natural sound, but to another magpie it is a meaningful statement.
If you have a really effective blue pill, then you can stay completely wrapped 
in a little bubble of your own rightness, your own preferences, your own 
opinions – and that is what we habitually try to do. We try to surround 
ourselves and sustain the world according to our own preferences so that 
we are always comfortable, always protected, always fully supplied with all 
the things that we like, with the people that we like. We would like never 
to have to deal with anything difficult or unwanted, which, of course, is 
impossible. But we keep trying for that. We keep trying to set our life up so 
that we will never have any difficult or painful situations; so we never have 
to be with any problematic or unpleasant people; so we will never have to 
deal with pain or loss or any of our faculties disappearing; so we will be able 
to see, hear, smell, taste, touch and think completely as we wish to, reliably 
smoothly and accurately; so we will never have any unwanted emotions 
like worry or fear or anger; so we will always be living in a completely clear, 
benign, happy state. That’s the dream of the blue pill.
So, as it says in the title, ‘Why wake up when my habits are so pleasant?’ 
As long as those habits can be fed and as long as we have a good supply 
of our drug of choice – whether it’s social approval, interesting TV 
programmes, perfect medical treatment, alcohol or prescription drugs, or

12
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
non-prescription drugs, that make us feel comfortable all the time – we will 
be able to sustain that illusion of a pleasant, independent, free existence 
that makes us feel content and happy all the time. We seek distraction to 
keep that illusion alive. Many of us have spent a lot of time drinking and 
using drugs – as they say, mood adjusters – adjusting our m ood so that we 
feel ‘good’. We endeavour to source enough painkillers, or spend money 
on consumer products, or gather glittering prizes, or just absorb into 
feelings of self-obsession, in order to bring that sense of at least temporary 
contentment and happiness, of well-being.
We like to believe in our opinions. We like to absorb into our own ideas and 
then criticize others who think differently. That is also a major occupation. 
How many of us (either ourselves or the people in our family, or our friends 
or people that we work with) continually criticize the world – praising 
this, grumbling about that, making a kind of fence, forming that bubble 
of our own feelings of rightness and judging others. ‘This is good, that is 
bad. This is right, that is wrong. I approve of this, I disapprove of that.’ We 
absorb into our opinions. We come up with rationalizations of why we feel 
what we do. We get a sense of comfort or reassurance through being able 
to explain everything. We tell ourselves, ‘This is why I feel this, this is why 
I feel that.’ We use our intellect to create that environment of comfort – or 
at least we try to.

13
REALITY
So the problem, at least in my experience, is that none of this really works. 
You can never quite take enough of the drug, you can never quite drink 
enough to feel perfectly good all the time. Then, when it’s taken to excess, 
it becomes socially unacceptable. You’re not allowed to drive or you cause 
accidents. Your friends as k you, ‘Why are you drinking so much?’
I ha ve had this experience myself many, many years ago on a Tuesday 
lunchtime at the local pub, The Swan, in Sutton Valence. This was before 
I became a monk, I hasten to add! I think this was around the summer of 
1977. There were only three of us in the pub. This friend of mine, who was 
quite the party animal herself, was introducing me to an acquaintance 
of hers who was an engineer. We were having a fascinating conversation 
about his work and a old friend of his who lived as a hermit up in the hills 
in the north of England. About an hour and a half into this conversation, 
this friend of mine asked, ‘Why are you drinking so much?’ I said, ‘What do 
you mean?’ somewhat defensively. She said, ‘Well, you’re on your eighth 
pint and it’s only half past twelve. It’s just the three of us. It’s not like 
we’re in the middle of a party. Why are you drinking so much?’ I replied, 
‘Because I want to. I feel like it.’ And then she said to me, ‘What are you 
afraid of?’ And that really hit me because that was both something I had 
never considered and an astute observation on her part. At the time I took 
refuge in explaining, self-justification, but it was a wake-up call for me. I 
had become unconscious of how I was drinking all the time to make myself

14
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
feel OK, even when the situation didn’t really call for it. There were just 
three of us in the pub. It wasn’t even one o’clock and I was already on my 
eighth pint. That’s a true story. 
So we get that feedback from the people around us, or we find out ourselves 
that we can’t drink enough to feel good, that we can’t stay distr acted 
enough and we get bored. We spend so many hours looking at websites 
on the internet, so many hours watching TV. How many excursions can 
you go on? How many holidays? How many books can you read, or write? 
How many home improvements can you make? How big a stūpa can you 
build? You have changed the curtains twice this year already and still you 
don’t feel happy. This is something that is really worthy of consideration. 
Mostly what we try and do is up the consumption of the blue pills. ‘I’m 
not trying hard enough. I need a bigger TV! It’s not the programs. I need 
a bigger screen. I need a better sound system. I need faster broadband. If 
I just had a higher speed internet, then I would be fine, I’d be happy.’ We 
keep increasing the dose. We keep increasing the consumption and it’s 
never quite enough. 
Many years ago, I did a university degree in Physiology and Psychology 
and one of the books that we studied was called The Physiology of Excitable 
Cells, which might sound very interesting but it was a challengingly dense 
book to get through. The content was interesting because an ‘excitable cell’

15
REALITY
is such as the cells of the eye, the ear, the tongue, the nose, the skin – the 
cells of the senses that produce an electric current that can vary when 
they are stimulated. With cells such as the rods and the cones in the eye, 
that enable us to see, when light hits the cells of the back of the eye they 
produce an electric current that goes down the optic nerve. If you have a 
bright light, the initial impact of that bright light landing on those cells 
sends a charge down the nerve, but then each cell adjusts because if the 
light stays strong, it says, ‘OK, we don’t need to keep sending such a strong 
signal,’ and it adjusts so that brightness becomes ordinary and bearable. No 
matter how strong the signal gets, the system will keep adjusting to make 
it ordinary, to make it normal. The stronger the taste, the louder the noise, 
the more variety there is in the flavour, no matter how strong or varied or 
intense or impactful it is, the system will always adjust to make it ordinary. 
Our neurophysiology is rigged for us to become bored. Change is what the 
system finds interesting and is evolutionarily developed to detect. 
An excitable cell will keep adjusting until it receives such a strong stimulus 
that it physically breaks down – like when the light is too bright and 
destroys the cell – or it goes down to the lower limit, where the stimulus is 
too weak to set off an impulse – such as too quiet a sound or too faint a light. 
Our whole system keeps adjusting so that anything we experience with the 
senses eventually becomes ordinary. That is why we get bored. When we

16
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
experience this our first reaction is usually to get a bigger screen, go to 
a different pub, to find a different partner or go to a different Ajahn. We 
keep going back to the same type of stimulation to get that feeling once 
more. We can do that but then ther e’s also that aching in the heart – being 
dissatisfied. It’s not quite enough, it’s not quite right, it’s not quite there, 
‘I’m not quite free, I’m not quite content.’
Going back to my partying days before I was a monk, I was thinking about 
this topic and I was reflecting how when I was a teenager, I used to feel 
really jealous of the friends of mine who could get completely lost in their 
moods or their feelings. They could get happily carried away. And I used 
to think, ‘I wish I could just switch off like them. Why do I keep thinking 
about things all the time?’ I would be in the middle of some party or some 
kind of adventure and say to myself, ‘Why is this interesting? Why are we 
doing this? What’s the point of this? Why is this supposed to be fun?’ If 
I said something like this my friends would look at me sideways, saying, 
‘What are you talking about?’ or, ‘Get another round in!’ That would be 
the response. As I was recollecting this, I realized I used to actually feel 
envious of them. ‘If only I could be mindlessly carefree like my friends, 
that would be great!’ I’m not trying to put them down, but that was 
the feeling that arose at the time. ‘I wish I could just be as wonderfully 
insensitive as my dear mates.’ Not all of them, but some of them. My

17
REALITY
mind kept asking these kinds of questions, ‘Why is nothing ever enough?
Why are we never really free?’
This, in a way, brings us to the question of why wake up when our habits 
are so pleasan t? That pleasantness is only one kind of happiness; that one 
kind of happiness is getting what you want, in whatever kind of dimension 
that might be. It might be that what you want is a Nobel Peace Prize – a 
very appropriate, beautiful thing – or it might be you want to out-compete 
others and get really rich, it might be you want just to stop feeling so much 
self-hatred, or to get totally wasted on a Saturday night, or to feel approved 
of, or just to feel happy and to be comfortable. That kind of happiness is 
the happiness of getting what you want. It is a kind of happiness, but it is a 
very shallow kind of happiness. The Buddha said this is a kind of pleasure, 
but it is a very coarse kind of pleasure. There is another kind of happiness 
that we can experience which is far superior to that, which is essentially 
the happiness of not craving anything, the happiness of true contentment, 
the happiness of the heart free from craving, the heart that has awakened 
to reality. That is a very different kind of happiness.
There is a significant sutta in the Middle Length Discourses called the 
Māgandiya Sutta (M 75). The Buddha is talking to a layman called Māgandiya 
who is quite a sensualist. He can’t understand this renunciation thing. He 
likes his food, he likes to drink, he likes fine clothes, he enjoys things, he

18
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
has a love for the sensual world. He can’t understand why anyone in their 
right mind would want to give up any kind of sense-pleasure, it just doesn’t 
make sense to him. Why would you deny yourself things that are fun, that 
are enjoyable? He is having a dialogue with the Buddha. The Buddha is a 
celibate monk, he is a renunciant who walked around North-East India 
barefoot for 45 years. Māgandiya can’t understand this issue. He asks, ‘Why 
would you give up so much happiness, so much pleasure when life has got 
so much to offer? What benefit do you see in the renunciant life?’ 
It is a very interesting little dialogue because the Buddha doesn’t put him 
down or criticize him at all. Instead, he says, ‘What do you think, Māgandiya, 
if after this lifetime you were reborn in the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven, one of the 
heavenly realms, and you were a  deva prince living in the Nandana Grove 
with a retinue of five hundred celestial nymphs – graceful dove-like maidens 
– that were your harem up in the heavenly realm, if you were there in the 
Nandana Grove with these five hundred dove-like nymphs, would you be 
interested in the life that you have here as a human being down in this 
world? How would that compare to living here, enjoying your favourite 
foods, running your business and living with your family? Would you be 
interested in this?’ Māgandiya replied, ‘Well no! I wouldn’t be interested in 
this at all, if I was up in the Tāvatiṃsa heaven with five hundred celestial 
nymphs to keep me company. What would be the appeal of such worldly

19
REALITY
kinds of happiness when what I would experience in the Tāvatiṃsa 
Heaven would be so vastly, immeasurably more pleasant, more delightful,
more satisfying?!’ 
The Buddha responded, ‘Exactly so, Māgandiya. It is not that I disregard or 
dismiss worldly pleasure in its own right, but I know a pleasure that is so 
far beyond it that it is as far above and beyond the pleasure of a  deva in the 
Nandana Grove as the pleasure of that deva is above the happiness of worldly 
life in the human realm. So it is not that I despise that worldly pleasure, or 
that I hate it or I fear it; it’s just not interesting to me because I know a 
pleasure that is far greater, far more profound, far more comprehensive. It 
is just not interesting.’ The Buddha is deliberately using a worldly example 
that Māgandiya could relate to to make his point; would you be envious if 
somebody had a small black and white TV with one channel when you had 
a TV with five hundred channels and a ten foot screen? It just wouldn’t be 
interesting because what you have available to you is far richer, far more 
pleasing, far more satisfying. 
So this, in a sense, is to do with the red pill. This is where we get to the 
red pill and why it’s a good idea to wake up. How do we discover that kind 
of happiness that is so much more profound, so much more complete? 
Essentially the reason why it is so superior is because it is a happiness that 
is independent of circumstances, where the kind of happiness of getting

20
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
what you want depends on having a supply of the things that you like, 
and having the right environment to experience it, and having the right 
people with you, and the right physiology. Someone can cook you the most 
delicious meal but if you are feeling sick, when they put it on the table in 
front of you, you feel, ‘Ugh.’ It is exactly what you like, it’s your favourite 
thing, they did it especially for you, but you take one look and say, ‘Ugh. 
Sorry, I can’t even look at it.’
A few years ago, Ajahn Pasanno and I were getting check-ups at a hospital 
in Bangkok. They were doing a full scale health check to see how we were, 
and unfortunately both of us reacted violently to some of the medicine 
they gave us in order to carry out the tests. We were having the checks 
through the morning. When they were done a meal offering was made for 
us with half the floor being covered with many delicious foods. The hospital 
team had obviously spent a huge amount of time and care preparing 
it all, but we could not eat anything. I took one look and had to race to 
the bathroom before I vomited profusely. The smell and the sight of this 
glorious and delicious food, that was offered with great sincerity and 
kindness, made me thoroughly sick. Monastics don’t run; we process, we 
never run. But I had to run to the bathroom before I vomited all over the 
corridor. The deliciousness of the food or the beauty of the object or the 
delightfulness of the sound is dependent, whereas the kind of happiness 
that comes from taking the red pill – the happiness that comes from

21
REALITY
waking up – is a whole different order. It’s not dependent on the senses,
it is not dependent on our conditioning.
•  •  •  
The means whereby we wake up, or how the Buddha encourages this, hinges 
around breaking free of the habits that we have of looking for security in, for 
example, what we look like – wanting to be young and attractive, needing 
to look appealing to others – wanting to always be comfortable, wanting to 
never be sick, never grow old, never to lose anybody that we love, never 
to lose anything that we feel we own. What he called ‘The Five Subjects 
for Frequent Recollection’ is the most common and accessible way of
recognizing those habits. 
We try to take refuge in and depend upon things that are undependable. We 
try to find security in things which are insecure, and try to find satisfaction 
in things that cannot satisfy. For example, I’m not sure of these statistics, 
but I have heard that the cosmetic industry is a $700 billion a year industry 
worldwide – $700 billion! In addition, even though, obviously, we need to 
look after our bodies and take care of our health in sensible and practical 
ways, how many of us spend huge amounts of our day worrying about 
ailments that we have, ailments that we might have, ailments that we have 
had, worried they are going to come back again or whether we might have 
them in the future? I’m not saying that we shouldn’t visit doctors or take

22
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
care of ourselves. All I’m saying is, just consider the amount of anxiety we 
experience, the amount of time, money and effort that is spent worrying 
about illness, trying to avoid it, fearing that it’s going to happen and 
worrying what certain sensations might mean.
So, ‘The Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection’ that the Buddha encourages 
us to pick up and explore every day are:
1 I am of the nature to age; I have not gone beyond ageing. 
2 I am of the nature to sicken; I have not gone beyond sickness. 
3 I am of the nature to die; I have not gone beyond dying. 
4 All that is mine, beloved and pleasing will become otherwise,
 will become separated from me.
5 I am the owner of my karma, heir to my karma, born of my karma, 
related to my karma, abide supported by my karma; whatever karma 
I shall do for good or for ill, of that I will be the heir. 
  (A 5.57)
Whenever this comes up, I find myself making a reassurance to people 
that the Buddha was very compassionate. He was not a sadist, he was not 
making fun of us or trying to make us feel bad or depressed from a selfcentred perspective, ‘You are ageing, you are going to get sick and you are 
going to die – ha ha ha.’ It is not that kind of attitude at all! It is a waking up 
from the delusion, that little bubble of self-view, hoping that we are never

23
REALITY
going to get old, hoping that we are never going to get sick, hoping that we 
are never going to die. 
I frequently do this little exercise: consider for a moment that every single 
human being reading this is g oing to die one day. Every single one – one 
hundred percent, no exceptions. None of us gets off this boat alive, right? 
Regardless of how old we are or how young we are, that’s a fact. Why is 
something in us surprised when we read that? When I say, ‘Everybody is 
going to die,’ something goes, ‘Huh, wait a minute, that can’t be quite right.’ 
What is it that is saying that can’t be right? What is it that is surprised when 
we get ill, get a cold, or have some kind of illness? What is surprised and 
feels it shouldn’t be this way or that something has gone wrong or that life 
is being unfair? Isn’t it weird that we feel something has gone wrong when 
the body gets sick? Why do we feel sad when we look in the mirror and 
there are a few more wrinkles and a few less hairs where we want them or 
more hairs in the wrong places? What feels wrong about that? Why is that 
saddening? Isn’t that strange? Because the conditioning from self-view is, 
‘I have the right to never get old, never get sick and never die.’ That is the 
delusion of self-view. That’s like a childlike attitude, ‘All the things that are 
mine, none of them should ever leave, unless I want to get rid of them and 
then they should be gone now. If things are mine, they should stay mine 
always and be exactly the way I like them. That’s the way it should be.’

24
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
That’s a five year-old child’s vision of the world but yet it affects us, even as 
supposedly mature adults. 
I would say that is the effect of the blue pill; the bubble of self-view that 
creates that and is desperately trying to make it so that, ‘I never lose 
anything that I love. All the things that are mine I keep. I don’t get old, 
I don’t get sick, I don’t die.’ If we look at the advertisements, unless it is 
an advertisement for a retirement plan or a stair lift, everybody in the 
advert is 23 and cheerful and good looking. Even the advertisements for 
undertakers; the coffins look really smart. As Ajahn Sucitto has pointed out, 
even when you are in your coffin, you are dressed up as if you are going to 
a dance. They put you in a dress or a suit that you rarely would have worn 
while you were alive. People quite often look better in the coffin than they 
ever did in real life.
When we have people lying in the Chapel of Rest here – when people ask for 
their bodies to be kept in the Amaravati Temple after they have died – we 
have no refrigeration, just the windows we can open. The bodies change 
according to their nature so that if you die and your body is there in the 
Chapel of Rest for five days or a week, then it becomes a food source for 
the organisms of the decaying process, for mould and so forth. The organic

25
REALITY
nature of change of a human body is going to be taking place. It is not 
preserved or frozen into an idealized form. 
That said, one of the questions that often arises with respect to these ‘Five 
Subjects for Frequent Recollection’ is that they are expressed in what seem 
to be very personal terms; how do statements like ‘I am of the nature to 
age’ or ‘I am the owner of my karma’ mesh with the teachings on not-self 
– anattā? Isn’t there a contradiction between the Buddha encouraging us 
to reflect that ‘ maraṇa-dhammomhi – I am of the nature to die’ and also to 
consider that ‘ rūpaṃ anattā – the body is not-self’? This can be confusing 
at first glance, however, the contrasting expressions are based on what 
is known as the two levels of truth: sammuti sacca , conventional or 
relative truth, and paramattha sacca , ultimate truth. For example, on the 
conventional level we say ‘the sun rises’ – in actuality it doesn’t, it only 
appears to because the earth is turning. Thus there can be two accurate but 
apparently contradictory statements made about the same thing: ‘the sun 
rises’ and ‘the sun doesn’t rise’ – both are true according to whether it’s a 
conventional or an ultimate perspective.
The Buddha was a very pragmatic teacher so he tended to begin his 
instructions with where most people were at – that is to say, identifying with 
body and mind – this is the conventional truth and so this is what ‘The Five 
Subjects for Frequent Recollection’ are aimed at. They are intended to help

26
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
the individual begin to loosen the habits of attachment and identification. 
Thus the reflections on ‘I am the owner of my karma, heir to my karma, 
born of my karma etc.’ are assisting the mind to see things in terms of the 
natural law of cause and effect; they are not intended to compound the 
sense of a doer or an achiever. The teachings on anattā, not-self – ‘the body 
is not-self, feeling is not-self, perception is not-self...’ and so on – these are 
designed to help things to be seen from the ultimate perspective, where the 
sense of self has been let go of completely. 
These reflections of ‘The Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection’ help us 
to challenge the habits that imprison the heart, the mind, because it is 
really nobody but us who are keeping that bubble in place and we don’t 
have to stay imprisoned in it. That said, we might recognize intellectually 
that, yes, it’s good to wake up, and yes, it’s good to break free from the 
bubble, but when we hear those words, ‘I’m of the nature to age, I’m of 
the nature to sicken, I’m of the nature to die,’ that is still challenging 
to the habits of self-view as they are more of an instinctual than an
intellectual construct. 
When I said that everyone reading this, all of these bodies, are going to 
die one day – it is that instinctual, self-centred aspect of mind which says, 
‘But, but, but... can we negotiate? Let’s talk about that.’ It is important to 
recognize that the habits of self-view are daunted by reality; ‘Welcome to

27
REALITY
the desert of the real.’ It’s a desert to the ego. It’s not what the ego wants to 
hear. You are getting older and you are getting more wrinkles. Everything 
is heading south – in my experience – unless you are young and still 
growing. Eventually, even for those who are youthful now, everything will 
head south. When we are able to recognize that, it’s painful to the ego, but 
simultaneously it is freeing to the heart.
As long as the mind’s view is based on ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’, then we 
are setting ourselves up for loss and depression and sadness when those 
changes occur, when things that we love go. If instead we take refuge in 
wisdom, in the Refuges, in Dhamma, in reality and in nature rather than 
in self-view, then as those changes occur we are ready for them. ‘Oh, there 
goes another one. Yeah, I used to be able to remember people’s names, and 
now, his name is… It’ll come to me.’ It’s gone! We can’t remember where we 
put our shoes. We can’t remember people’s addresses, things erode. If we 
are wise and we recognize, ‘There goes another one,’ it’s not experienced as 
a sense of diminution, we are not diminished. As it says in a poem of Rumi’s, 
‘When were you ever made any the less by dying?’ Things come, things go. 
What has that got to do with anything fundamentally real? When the heart 
meets the experience of change and uncertainty, it experiences freedom. 
The experience is one of limitlessness and wonderment, rather than fear. 
One of the Upanishads, the Brihadaranyaka, begins with a passage that, 
abbreviated, says something like, ‘Originally there was the mind of the

28
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
absolute filling the infinite void. And in the mind of the absolute there 
arose the thought, “I am”. With the thought, “I am”, there arose fear. With 
fear there arose desire’ (Bṛh IV 1.4.1-3). When the ‘I am’ arises in our mind, 
there is the other, there is that which is outside, and then there is a sense 
of me here, the world out there, and then there is a sense of threat. How 
we fend off that feeling of threat or danger or insecurity is we get stuff. 
The mind goes to desire, to protect ourselves, or to get things, or to be 
someone, and then the whole cycle begins. If we follow the Buddha’s advice 
and we reflect, ‘This is the way nature works; I am of the nature to age, the 
nature to sicken, to die; all that is mine, beloved and pleasing will become 
otherwise, will become separated from me; I’m the owner of my karma and 
so forth,’ then the attitude changes in a radical way. Rather than it being 
experienced as ‘Something that was mine is being lost,’ it is recognized as, 
‘There wasn’t anybody here to own anything, and nothing that could truly 
be owned in the first place.’
How could anything really be owned? Can you own a cloud or the moon, or 
even a tree, really? It’s ridiculous. ‘The moon is mine.’ What? Sometimes 
people have done that kind of thing. I think the story goes that when Vasco 
Núñez de Balboa, the Spanish explorer, got to the Pacific Ocean he stood on 
the shore and said, ‘I claim this sea and all that’s in it for Spain.’ This little 
human being standing on a beach saying, ‘I claim the Pacific Ocean. This

29
REALITY
is mine, for my country.’ It’s particularly ridiculous. It is one little human 
being saying, ‘We are now the owners of the whole Pacific Ocean. This
belongs to my country.’
A recent book of Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings is titled Don’t Take Your Life 
Personally. It is such a complete teaching that all you really need is the title. 
‘Don’t take your life personally’. It’s challenging, because we feel like, ‘That’s 
me in the mirror. These are my sensations and these are my aches and pains. 
These are my problems, my hopes, my achievements.’ We can, however, use 
the reflections, ‘I am of the nature to age. I am of the nature to sicken,’ to 
shift the view, change the perspective and break out of that prison of habit. 
We take our mind, our thoughts, memories, feelings and moods so 
personally. We feel, ‘I’m angry, I’m jealous, I’m fearful, I’m sleepy, I’m in 
pain.’ We do experience all of those ‘I am’s’ but if the attitude is tweaked, 
the view is changed to make these experiences not so personal. They are 
not put into the framework of ‘I’ve got this’ or ‘this is mine’, but rather as 
a flow of experience. We can also use simple phrases such as, ‘being the 
knowing’, or, ‘the mind is not a person’, or, ‘the mind is Dhamma’, to help 
the realization of this. The more that the sense of self is understood as it 
is – a natural psychological structure but not something that has to be a 
limiting factor in this life or this experience of being – the more the heart 
can be free.

30
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
This changing of perspective is not only in reference to bad experiences, 
but to good ones as well. There can be a large amount of ego behind 
someone’s success. Let’s say you notice a need for healthy fruit juices in 
eco-friendly packaging, so you start a company. If the idea works and is 
successful, you can say, ‘Well, this seems to be helpful. OK. And this looks 
like a good direction. Let’s keep heading this way and see what happens,’ 
rather than, ‘I’m great. Look at what a brilliant idea I had and all the money 
I have made!’ In the same way, if the business does not succeed and you 
lose a great deal of money, you can look at that as a way of learning and 
improving, rather than, ‘I’m a failure. This is a disaster. What will people 
think of me?’ This happens in the monastic life, too. You can make a choice 
and be praised for it, or make a choice and be criticized for it. No matter 
what the outcome of the situation is, or the judgement from those around 
you, you cannot turn the clock back. You can look at all this instead and say, 
‘This is good. I will learn from it.’ Or, ‘This is bad. I will learn from it.’
•  •  • 
When we change the point of view, there is a desert and the ‘desert of the 
real’ is a challenge – ‘I’m of the nature to age, I’m of the nature to sicken’ – it 
threatens the habits of self-view. But it is important to notice that the point 
of that reflection is the freedom of the heart that comes from realizing,

31
REALITY
‘Of course. How could it be otherwise? That’s how nature operates. How 
could something be born that doesn’t die? How can something begin and 
not end? It can’t be. That’s not the way nature works.’ That attunement 
to reality brings with it enormous relief. The fear that is there in our little 
pod of self-view disappears. There isn’t that sense of needing to collect and 
protect and to own, and the subsequent feeling of threat, but rather there’s 
an openness. There is an ease within us.
There is another saying – I believe it was from Suzuki Roshi, who was a 
Zen teacher living in the United States who founded the San Francisco Zen 
Center – about this kind of topic. He said, ‘Be very careful before you get on 
this train because it doesn’t stop.’ Once you’re out of your little pod, you can’t 
go back in. You might try. Once we have taken the red pill we can’t untake 
it. I think many of us, having had those kinds of moments of realization, 
have thought, ‘This is all a bit pointless, really, this status and career and 
trying to be totally competent all of the time, it’s all a bit silly,’ but once we 
have seen it, even though we might want to, we can’t really unsee it; it’s 
like learning to ride a bicycle, the body remembers, you can’t unlearn how 
to ride a bike. Once you have learned it, it’s there in the system. Once we’ve 
seen that, even if we might try to avoid it, it’s there within us. We might try 
to bury ourselves in getting busy or being absorbed in worldly activity but 
something in us is saying, ‘You know this is all a bit of a waste of time really.’

32
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
There is something in us, those habits of self-view that say, ‘Oh, shut up, 
don’t say that, I’m busy here.’ In a way it is important to recognize that 
effort to suppress, and to have compassion for that in us which wants to 
hide away, which wants to get back into the pod, that is looking for the 
blue pill to go back to sleep, that would prefer the delusion. This morning 
I was recollecting that in California they like to have bumper stickers, 
strips of text one puts on the back bumper of one’s car. A popular one in 
the San Francisco Bay Area was, ‘I’ve given up my search for truth and I’m 
now looking for a good fantasy’. This is a joke, but not a joke. Something 
in us does want to switch off, ‘I wish I could just not feel. I wish I could 
just check out. If I could only just forget.’ And part of us would like to, so 
as Suzuki Roshi said, ‘I would think long and hard before you get on this 
train because you won’t be able to get off.’ Once you’ve taken the red pill,
you can’t un-take it.
I think many of us can recognize those feelings of regret or the urge to 
switch off, that part of us that would like to go back to sleep – like when you 
have woken up but you were having a really good dream and you are kind 
of awake but the dream hasn’t quite finished yet. A part of you thinks, ‘I was 
enjoying that. If I could just doze off again and go back to that dream.’ Many 
of us have had that experience. I certainly have. ‘Oh, I was enjoying that. 
Can I just go back and have a little bit more? Just a teensy bit more of that.’

33
REALITY
It is important to listen to that, to respect that, but also to recognize that’s 
not what you want to put in charge of your life, that we can do better than 
that. It’s important to be able to recognize, ‘What was that all about? Why 
was I getting so upset about that? So excited about that? Why did I make 
such a big thing of it?’
My father and my mother were bull terrier breeders, that’s how they met; 
they were also farmers but they maintained a lifelong interest in dogs. My 
father eventually had a career writing in a dog magazine and judging dog 
shows around the world, and he became a big figure. He was known as ‘The 
Pope of bull terriers’. Really, I’m not kidding you! He was a seriously big 
figure in the world of dog breeding and he was quite pleased with that. 
His calendar would be filled three or four years in advance with all the dog 
shows he was invited to judge around the planet and he was treated with 
great respect in that field. He was one of the board members of The Kennel 
Club, which is the main dog breeding organization for the UK. You have to 
retire from the board when you’re 75, so when he reached that age and had 
stepped down from the board, he said, ‘Everyone assumes I’m no longer 
judging, I’m no longer writing, I’m no longer in the field, so I’ve stopped 
getting all the invitations. People don’t make contact with me any more.’ 
He thus had a period between when he was 75 and when he was 80 when 
he wasn’t being called upon to travel around the world or be that figure

34
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
very much any mor e, so he had a lot more time on his hands and the 
opportunity to reflect. During those years, however, the dénouement of 
his life came about by his being invited to judge the Best in Show at Crufts, 
which in the dog breeding world is like arahantship. The consummation 
of potential in that domain is to judge the Best in Show at Crufts. Running 
up to that event, which took place less than a year before he died, he made 
an impressive and wonderful comment one day. He said, ‘I’m a big fish, 
but it’s a very small pond.’ I thought, ‘Wow, good for you Dad,’ because 
ten years before I reckon there is no way he could ever have said that.
As his life was coming to an end – and also since many of his friends were 
dropping dead around him from cirrhosis of the liver, kidney disease, 
heart failure, lung cancer and so on – and since the system wasn’t 
really drawing him into that world in such a strong way – he naturally 
got a bit of perspective and the wisdom of his years bore fruit. I was
touched and impressed. 
His last couple of years were quite peaceful and gracious in many ways. 
He wasn’t hanging on, trying to be the Pope of bull terriers until his last 
breath. He was happy to let that all go. One day he also said, ‘It’s only dogs, 
really.’ I forget who else in the family was in the room, but I think there was 
a collective turning of heads: ‘Dad just said what!?’ It’s only dogs. It would 
be like me saying, ‘It’s only Buddhism.’ It was very wonderful to see that 
kind of perspective, that sense of letting go.

35
REALITY
The importance of waking up – taking the red pill and not being afraid, 
when you’re ready to go into the desert experience – the point is not just 
the harshness of the desert experience, but that if one passes through that, 
if you let yourself feel that sense of loss or challenge to self-view, the result, 
on the other side of the desert is the freeing of the heart. The point is that 
sense of ‘Ahh…’ the sense of relaxation and ease, the safety of the other 
side of the desert, the security that one experiences on the other side of the 
wasteland, or at least when at an oasis, that is to say enjoying periods or 
even moments of non-attachment. 
Tall trees, a river, pools where swallows fly,
Thickets of oleander where doves coo,
Shades deep as midnight, greenness for tired eyes,
Hark how the light winds in the palm-tops sigh.
Oh this is rest. Oh this is paradise.
Wilfred Scawen Blunt, The Oasis of Sidi Khaled
I was reminded when thinking of these themes how Luang Por Sumedho 
often used to quote from the Hermann Hesse novel, The Journey to the 
East, where the main protagonist of the story sets off with the League, 
a group of people on their spiritual journey to Asia. They go out on the 
pilgrimage together and their route takes them through a fearsome gorge 
called Morbio Inferiore, which symbolizes the Valley of Despair. And while

36
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
they are crossing Morbio Inferiore, the person who is telling the story 
loses heart and convinces himself these people are deluded, ‘They don’t 
know what they’re doing, we’re all going to die, this is all a stupid idea, 
it’s much better for me to go back home.’ He turns around, thinking that 
he has left the fools behind and returns to his familiar life, he carries on 
with his known world. By chance, many years later, he comes across Leo, 
the person who was leading the pilgrimage. He says something like, ‘Oh, 
it’s you. I last saw you in the gorge thirty, forty years ago. I thought you 
were all lost and that you were all wasting your time.’ He said ‘No, no. 
It wasn’t us who were wasting our time, we were making the Journey. It 
was you who turned back. You’re the one who got lost in the desert, we 
were fine. You decided to believe your own self-centred perspective and 
you turned back. It was you that lost out. We made it through to the East 
and found spiritual fulfilment.’ It’s an interesting story like The Matrix,  I 
would recommend it. It has a lot of Dhammic, insightful messages in it.
When we are ready to meet that desert experience and pass through it, 
then if we have the faith, the commitment and also the kalyāṇamitta, if we 
are ready to be supported by our good spiritual friends, then at the other 
side of the desert we will find that quality of fulfilment and refreshment 
and true contentment, true ease, the happiness of not wanting anything, 
not lacking anything, the happiness of not craving, the happiness of the

37
REALITY
heart that is independent of all circumstance. I would encourage us not to 
lose heart as we meet those desert experiences: being abandoned by your 
loved ones; more aching joints than you realized you had in the body; more 
wrinkles than you thought were possible; more urges to dye your hair a 
couple of times a week... Do not lose heart! Rather have the courage to draw 
upon the support of and offer support to your kalyāṇamitta and, once on the 
other side of the desert, or at least at an oasis, we will find that quality of 
freedom, contentment and fulfilment that is our potential.



‘Of Course, it is Happening Inside
Your Head, Harry, but Why on Earth
Should That Mean That it is Not Real?’
Again, the title of this chapter might seem a little esoteric for a Dhamma 
reflection but for those readers who are acquainted with the Harry Potter 
books, or who have watched the films, the quotation will probably be 
quite familiar. One of the reasons this topic was chosen is because two of 
my favourite subjects, to wit the Harry Potter stories and the Buddha’s 
phenomenological approach to Dhamma, seem to come together very 
neatly in this quotation. 
This is a spoiler alert in case you are not familiar with the stories already, 
or if you intend to read them. Right at the end of the many years of conflict 
between Harry Potter, a young wizard, and the arch figure of discord and 
danger called Lord Voldemort – after they’ve had a duel and Harry has 
been zapped and is dead on the forest floor – it seems like Lord Voldemort 
has slain him. However, Harry then appears in some kind of bardo realm, 
formed in the shape of Kings Cross Station for reasons known to the author 
but also as it has a role in the story. Harry then meets his late mentor, 
Albus Dumbledore, who used to be the headmaster of Hogwarts School of

40
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Witchcraft and Wizardry, who had died in a previous book. Harry is naturally 
surprised to meet Dumbledore there because he’s supposed to be d ead. 
Then, Harry having remembered that he got zapped by Lord Voldemort, 
deduces that he’s now dead too. There ensues a dialogue between Harry 
and his late mentor. 
Harry, while having this conversation with an apparently very much alive 
Albus Dumbledore, at a certain point asks, ‘Is this real? Or has this been 
happening inside my head?’ So he’s trying to figure out what’s going on, 
where he is and what the situation is. Dumbledore’s response to him is:  
‘Of course, it is happening inside your head, Harry, but why on earth should 
that mean that it is not real?’ 
When the book that this is in, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , first came 
out, I thought, ‘That’s a very neat way of expressing a very important 
principle.’ It relates to a theme that is very common in Luang Por Sumedho’s 
teachings, which is this observation that, ‘The world is in your mind.’ We 
think of ourselves as ‘me moving around in the world’ and that the world 
is outside us, but over and over again Luang Por would say, ‘Actually, the 
world is in your mind.’ This is not something that’s difficult to recognize 
or to acknowledge, because right at this moment, everything that every 
single one of us knows about this present reality is through seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, touching, thinking, imagining, memory, language.

41
REALITY
Here is the experience of ‘reading a book written by Ajahn Amaro’. That 
perception of the present reality is pieced together from what we feel, what 
we see, what we remember, what we think, our understanding of language 
– those are all mental events, are they not? Seeing: if you close your eyes, 
the text vanishes. If you are having a device read this to you, if you block 
your ears or take the earphones away, the book vanishes. Unblock the ears, 
open the eyes then it appears again. 
Over and over, Luang Por Sumedho would emphasize this. The world is in 
the mind. We think that we are going places and doing things. But all along 
the centre of the world is your heart; the heart of the universe, the heart of 
the world, is your heart. Wherever we were born – whether we’re Sri Lankan 
or English or Thai or American or French or German or Italian or Norwegian 
or Chinese or African or Australian, or from anywhere on the planet – for 
every single one of us throughout our entire lives, and wherever we were, 
it was always here, right? Whether you were a small child, whether you 
were an adult, on whatever continent your body happened to be parked, 
wherever you were, there was a feeling of hereness.
Life is experienced here, right? It doesn’t take psychic powers to tell us 
that’s how it is for all of us. Wherever we are – if we are seeing India or 
seeing Latvia, seeing Italy or seeing Kent, or seeing California or Oslo – 
that is ‘seeing’ arising in consciousness, ‘hearing’ arising in consciousness, 
feeling, smelling, tasting, touching. The world has only ever happened in

42
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
our minds. Everything that we’ve ever known about the world has been 
known through the agency of this mind. 
•  •  • 
The first time I got to contemplate that principle in a serious way was in 
1983. I was just about to set off on a long walk all the way through England, 
myself and a layman, Nick Scott, departing from Chithurst Monastery in 
West Sussex to walk on a winding route all the way through England up 
to the newly opened branch monastery at Harnham in Northumberland. 
I had been preparing for this walk for many months. One of the monks 
at Chithurst had been a shoemaker before he was ordained. We made a 
pair of sandals together for me to use. I was going out on training walks 
and figuring out what gear I was going to take, and contacting the various 
people that had made invitations. There had been a lot of preparing and, 
as I’d only been a monk for about four years at that time, and I was in my 
mid-twenties, there was a lot of restless youthful energy in the mix. 
The morning we were aiming to leave, in early May of 1983, Luang Por 
Sumedho offered a Dhamma reflection. He would do this pretty much every 
day, for the whole community in the monastery, but this day he focused it 
particularly for us prospective walkers. Everyone knew that we were going 
to be setting off that day. One of the comments that he made really stuck

43
REALITY
with me. What he said was, ‘In actual fact there is nobody going anywhere. 
There are just conditions changing.’
When you were setting off on your epic journey, planning to be walking 800+ 
miles on a wiggly route all the way through England, a great adventure, that 
was a wonderfully appropriate reflection. There’s nobody going anywhere, 
because even as the body is walking along, it’s always here. Even if you’re 
running, you’re always here. Even if you’re moving at speed on a high speed 
train, you’re going at 125 miles an hour or you’re in an aeroplane going 600 
or 700 miles an hour, it always is felt as here. Life happens here and now. 
What that realization does is that it puts that experience of movement and 
change into a context. It counteracts the attitude, the habit of thinking in 
terms of ‘Me going somewhere’, ‘Me, this individual, passing through time, 
going from here to there, going from this event to that’. It puts that in a 
different context. In the suttas, there’s a similar exchange. It’s a well known 
dialogue between the Buddha and a  deva called Rohitassa. It recounts 
how Rohitassa had been a yogi with great psychic powers in his previous 
lifetime. On this particular occasion this  deva appeared before the Buddha 
and spoke to him, saying:
‘In my last lifetime I was a yogi and I had considerable psychic powers, I 
was able to walk through the sky. I made a resolution that I would walk 
until I reached the end of the world. Even though I committed myself

44
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
to this vow, and I walked and I walked and I walked, and I didn’t stop 
to do anything apart from occasionally to rest, or answer the calls of 
nature, even though I walked my whole life, I never reached the end of 
the world and I died whilst still on the journey. So, please, Venerable Sir, 
can you offer your reflections on this? Is it possible to reach the end of 
the world?’
The Buddha said to Rohitassa:
‘You cannot reach the end of the world by walking but I tell you 
that unless you reach the end of the world, you won’t reach the end
of suffering.’ 
That’s a conundrum, isn’t it? Then he makes this very interesting and 
powerful comment. He continued: 
‘It is, friend, in just this fathom-high carcass endowed with perception 
and mind, that I make known the world, the origin of the world, the 
cessation of the world, and the way leading to the cessation of the world.’ 
(S 2.26)
It might well be recognized that that’s a close copy of the format of the 
Four Noble Truths, but the word ‘world’ is put in place of the word ‘dukkha’, 
unsatisfactoriness, suffering. The Buddha is saying that unless you reach 
the end of ‘the world’, you won’t reach the end of suffering. Now, those of us 
who have a life affirming habit might feel, ‘But I love the world. I don’t want

45
REALITY
to look forward to the end of the world. This is “A wonderful world”! Are you 
promoting annihilation of the planet or wishing for the whole solar system 
to get swallowed up in a black hole? Why do you want the world to end?’ 
One of the aims here is to address what the Buddha means when he talks 
about ‘the world’,  loka, and why should the end of the world be something 
that is attractive or appealing? The Buddha was very skilled at speaking 
in ways that could shock and would get your attention. Since Rohitassa 
thought that getting to the end of the world was something that was 
achievable on the material plane, the Buddha is saying, ‘You need to modify 
your understanding of what “the world” is and how the spiritual process 
works. You’re not seeing it in a wise way, in an accurate way.’
It’s also interesting that in the notes to this passage in the Saṃyutta Nikāya, 
Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi, the translator, makes a particularly significant 
comment. He is a discerning scholar, very skilled at Pali and English, and he 
also received a PhD in philosophy from an American university before he 
became a Buddhist monk. On the statement of the Buddha that, ‘It is, friend, 
in just this fathom-high carcass endowed with perception and mind, that I 
make known the world, the origin of the world, the cessation of the world, 
and the way leading to the cessation of the world,’ he makes the comment, 
‘This pithy utterance of the Buddha ... may well be the most profound 
proposition in the history of human thought’ and he’s not one who speaks

46
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
in extravagant or hyperbolic ways. He’s very careful with the comments he 
makes so that’s quite a statement from Bhikkhu Bodhi. Significantly, the 
value of it hinges around what we think of as ‘the world’.
Our ordinary everyday understanding is that the world equals this planet 
Earth. This is how we generally use the word in English. In the Buddha’s 
time, similarly, they talked about  loka as the planet that everyone was 
standing, sitting, lying down on and experiencing. But then in a parallel 
discourse, closely connected to this dialogue with Rohitassa, he spells out 
a different approach (S 35.116). He says, ‘The world, the world – what do 
we mean when, we say “the world”?’ He goes on to say, ‘That whereby 
one is a perceiver of the world and a conceiver of the world, that is called 
“the world” in this Dhamma and discipline. And what is it whereby one is 
a perceiver and a conceiver of the world? The eye, the ear, the nose, the 
tongue, the body, the mind – that is the means whereby one is a perceiver 
of the world and a conceiver of the world.’
The Pali word meaning to conceive of the world is  loka-māni,  a perceiver 
of the world is  loka-saññi. What he’s saying is that ‘the world’ is the world 
of our experience. That’s the only world that we can meaningfully talk 
about: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking, remembering, 
imagining. We can’t meaningfully talk about a world that is beyond our 
experience, we can only talk about the world that we know. This is the

47
REALITY
world that each of us has always perceived and has lived in, that comprises 
our life. The world is built up from the perceptions of our body, our 
personality, our life story, who we think we are, the name we call ourselves. 
This is all built up of these perceptions. The only world we can know and 
meaningfully talk about is our mind’s version of the world.
•  •  • 
In ordinary everyday life, we talk about the world, and we assume that our 
version of the world is reality and other people’s versions of ‘the world’, 
if they’re different, they are perhaps good people, but they’re deluded. 
Instead, when we consider things in this different way – that the world 
is in the mind and that the world that we know is fabricated from what 
we see, hear, smell, taste and touch, what we think, what we remember, 
our language, our imagination – then that makes the world a bit more 
dependent, subjective doesn’t it? It is known that this can only be one of an 
infinite, fluid variety of versions of the world. 
This is what in Western philosophy is called a phenomenological approach. 
The basic principle of phenomenology is that the only world you can 
meaningfully talk about is the world of your own experience. That’s the 
phenomenon that is known. This field was developed by people such as 
Edmund Husserl, who was a German philosopher, whose most famous 
student was Martin Heidegger. Interestingly, if you consult Wikipedia’s

48
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
entry on ‘Buddhism in Western philosophy’, there is an account of Husserl 
saying that when he was reading the German translations of the  suttas, he 
‘couldn’t put it down.’ The Buddha’s teaching was so closely in alignment 
with how he saw things that it was a huge confirmation for him, and 
something that was deeply illuminating.
Husserl was teaching and writing in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries 
but there have been philosophers thinking about these issues way back into 
the Greek times – this idea that all that we experience is just in our minds, 
like Harry asking Dumbledore, ‘Is this really happening? Or is this all just in 
my head?’ That question has been asked in the West since ancient Greece 
at least. Sometimes people will come to the conclusion that, ‘Yes, it is. It’s 
all in our mind and the only real thing in the world is our own mind.’ In 
Western philosophy this is called solipsism. It is the belief or view that our 
mind is the only real thing and other people don’t really exist; nothing is 
real apart from our own experience and the mind is merely witnessing a 
huge illusion or dream.
This kind of idea can get us into very deep psychological water and it is 
easy to get lost in it. In offering Dhamma reflections I try to avoid creating 
more confusion because, of course, this is all about ending suffering rather 
than increasing it. However, I do feel it’s useful to understand what other 
people have said and thought in this area. So, if it is all in my head, if things 
don’t really exist apart from what I’m seeing and feeling, then what is going

49
REALITY
on, what’s real, what’s happening? One of the philosophers that actively 
addressed this area was Bishop Berkeley, after whom Berkeley, California, 
is named. One of his propositions was that no item can be said to truly 
exist unless it is observed. If you have a shrine in the room where you are 
sitting reading this, you might say that the shrine behind you doesn’t exist, 
because you are not observing it. Someone else, sitting in a different place 
in the room, might be observing it, so it exists for them but you can’t say 
that it exists because you can’t see it. So this is the philosophy that things 
don’t exist unless someone is observing them. Bishop Berkeley apparently 
used the example of the oak tree standing in the quadrangle of his college 
as an example. Since the oak tree wouldn’t exist if no one was watching it, 
the good bishop took this as a proof of the existence of God. The logic being 
that since God was always watching everything, therefore the existence of 
objects was sustained. I was pondering this theme today and I remembered 
a couple of limericks that a student wrote many years ago, describing 
Berkeley’s philosophy:
There was a young man who said, ‘God
must think it is exceedingly odd 
to find that this tree 
continues to be 
when there’s no one about in the quad.’
The response to that is,

50
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
‘Dear sir, your astonishment’s odd. 
I am always about in the quad 
and that’s why this tree 
will continue to be,
signed yours faithfully, God.’
I don’t know why my mind remembers these things, but it does. I didn’t 
even have to look that one up. 
•  •  • 
Then: what is real? What can be trusted? What is meaningful? Such 
questions can make you crazy or at least riddled with doubt in this respect, 
if you are not careful. If you take the idea that you’re the only real thing 
and everybody else doesn’t exist, then you can get yourself into very deep 
water. Those of you who’ve ever read any Kurt Vonnegut books might be 
familiar with his Breakfast of Champions . A character in the novel called 
Dwayne Hoover reads a science fiction book. The book is written in the 
form of the author telling the reader, ‘You are the only existent being in 
the world. Everyone else is a zombie or a robot, they don’t really exist. You, 
however, do and this book has been written specially for you. This is your 
set of instructions.’ 
He’s reading a novel but this character, Dwayne Hoover, is crazy enough 
to think, ‘It’s talking to me! I am the only real person in the world and

51
REALITY
everyone else is just a robot or a zombie. They don’t really exist. They don’t 
really count.’ Then he starts to act on that premise and, naturally, all kinds 
of chaos follow from that. Hi ho. So it goes.
If we take this principle in the wrong way – that my mind is the only real 
and important thing and nothing else matters – then we steer ourselves 
either towards being a sociopath or towards psychosis. I definitely do not 
encourage that! But rather, using this reflection that ‘everything that 
we experience is our mind’s version of reality’, if it’s seen in the correct 
context, if it’s seen in a skilful way, rather than being something that makes 
us crazy, disconnected or disrespectful, it has the opposite effect. It helps 
us to be more accommodating and compassionate.
For example, when I open my eyes and look forward, I can see my finger 
pointing to the left E. For someone on the other side of the room looking 
at my hand, when they look at this same finger, they’d say it was pointing 
to the right F. My truth says ‘left’, their truth says ‘right’, and yet we’re 
both 100% correct. Thus my version of reality can seemingly be completely 
different to somebody else’s version of reality, but we can still relate 
respectfully and be in harmony with each other, if we appreciate the factor 
of points of view. 
When we recognize what we are experiencing as simply our mind’s version 
of the world, rather than some absolute truth, if that’s held within a context

52
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
of Dhamma, we recognize that of course everybody else’s version of reality 
is going to be slightly different. Why should my version be the version? 
Why should my version of the world be the defining version? What makes 
my version of reality more true, more real, more accurate than yours? That 
realization leads to a quality of respectfulness, humility and a capacity to 
live harmoniously with others because we’re not taking our opinion, our 
experience, our feelings, our perceptions, our conditioning as being what 
defines the truth, reality.
To take a slightly different approach on this issue: as long as we’re making 
the world some thing – where we are apparently an independent being 
existing in time and the world is a thing out there, and there’s me going 
from one place to another – we’re creating self, we’re creating time and 
we’re creating location. That is  dukkha. As long as the mind is seeing things 
in terms of self-view and in terms of time, it’s deeply attached to birth 
and death and the conditioned realm. That’s why the Buddha said that he 
equates the loka, the world, with  dukkha, with suffering, because as long as 
the mind makes the world solid and real, makes time real, makes identity 
real and makes location real, all that is necessarily conducive to  dukkha.
If we attach to self-view, stating, say, ‘I am Ajahn Amaro. I am 67 years old.’ 
In terms of self-view that’s an absolute fact, it is taken to be unquestionably 
true. However, that attaching to self-view necessarily brings  dukkha with

53
REALITY
it. For example, my sisters sometimes have to think twice before they call 
me Ajahn Amaro. Actually they never call me ‘Ajahn’ anything! For my dear 
sisters, to them I am their little brother and I will be remembered in that 
context. When they write me an email it’s to ‘Dear A’ as, within themselves, 
I’m still that little brother rather than their Ajahn. If I insisted they always 
address me as ‘Ajahn’  dukkha would follow for sure.
The degree to which the mind creates the world as solid is the degree to 
which it creates suffering. The degree to which the mind can see the world 
as empty, as suñña, that it is void of intrinsic substance – that time, location 
and the feeling of identity are based on perceptions and conditioning, how 
they are not the whole story – that’s the degree to which the heart will 
know non-suffering and will not be creating disharmony or  dukkha. 
•  •  • 
Luang Por Chah was very fond of using puzzles or questions, conundrums 
that he would put to people. Again, exactly like the Buddha, he could phrase 
things in a way that was quite startling and Ajahn Chah would be aiming for 
this. One conundrum Ajahn Chah would ask was, ‘If you can’t go forward 
and you can’t go back and you can’t stand still, where can you go?’ I often 
repeat this and use it in Dhamma talks because I feel it’s an incredibly nifty 
and skilful approach.

54
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Someone trying to answer Luang Por’s question might say, ‘Can you
go sideways?’
‘No, you can’t go sideways. You can’t dig a hole and you can’t climb a tree. 
You can’t go forwards, can’t go back, you can’t go sideways, you can’t go up, 
you can’t go down. Where do you go? Where can you go?’ 
He would pin you down with this kind of question, knowing that it’s a mind 
game, a puzzle, but one that’s laden with wisdom. ‘You can’t go forward, 
you can’t go back. You can’t stand still, can’t go to either side – where can 
you go?’ If one reflects on that, the only way that the puzzle can be resolved 
is if the mind lets go of identification with place, with time and with selfview, with all those qualities. If we think of ourselves as an independent 
being that is this body, that is passing through time, that is in this place 
where we are reading these words then, if we take that as an absolute 
reality, we’re creating  dukkha. The only way that conundrum can be solved 
is for time, self and location to be let go of. This means the heart needs 
to awaken to that aspect of its nature that is unborn and unconditioned, 
uncreated, unformed – this is the solution to the puzzle.
In the Udāna, the collection of the Buddha’s ‘Inspired Utterances’, he makes 
the same kind of statement. In this particular passage, the Buddha said: 
There is that āyatana, that sphere of being, where there is no earth, water, 
fire or wind ... no moon, no sun ... this sphere I call neither a coming nor

55
REALITY
a going nor a staying still, neither a dying nor a reappearance ... And 
this, just this, is the end of  dukkha.  (Ud 8.1)
Within that sutta there is the phrase about coming, going and standing still, 
this points to the same issue that is explored by Luang Por Chah’s conundrum; 
as long as the mind thinks in terms of self-view, time, identity and place, 
there’s no solution to that puzzle. However, when the heart awakens to that 
dimension of its own reality which is unborn, undying, which is timeless, 
which is selfless, unlocated, then the solution to the puzzle is realized. 
This is speaking about a level of insight that is quite profound. It’s not 
even ‘me’ having an insight or ‘you’ having an insight, rather it’s the mind 
awakening to that dimension of its own nature, which has always been 
unborn and undying, which is timeless. The very name of the monastery 
Amaravati, refers to this: ‘The Deathless Realm’. This does not just mean 
Amaravati as a physical place, but rather it is a reminder about the 
transcendent Amaravati – Amaravati with a really big ‘A’ – that deathless 
reality, the unborn reality that is the foundation of this very heart, this 
very mind of ours.
Another conundrum that Ajahn Chah liked to use is the image of what he 
called ‘still, flowing water’. When people came to visit, by way of opening 
up a Dhamma theme, he would ask, ‘Have you ever seen still water?’ And 
people would answer, ‘Yes, of course.’ He then would ask, ‘Have you ever

56
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
seen flowing water?’ And they would reply, ‘Yes. I’ve seen the river and 
streams and... of course I’ve seen flowing water.’ Then he would say, ‘Have 
you ever seen still, flowing water?’ And they would usually respond, ‘Huh?’ 
or be silent or say, ‘I don’t know what you mean, Luang Por!’
After he said, ‘Have you ever seen still, flowing water?’ he would let the 
person ponder and squirm for a bit, coming up with a few tries about 
what the words might mean. He would then explain that the mind is like 
still, flowing water. This is a description of the nature of mind. It ‘flows’, 
because there is a constant flow of perceptions and thoughts and feelings 
that arise, come into being and then fade – our memories, our ideas, our 
emotions. That which we see, hear, smell, taste and touch continually 
arises and flows, yet there is an abiding quality of ‘stillness’. The mind 
can know that quality of change and flow and that knowing is perfectly 
present; it’s not going anywhere. It is a transcendent stillness as it is not 
bound up with place or time. So, the mind is like still, flowing water. 
There’s the quality of stillness, and there’s the quality of flowing and they 
work together, they’re mutually supportive. They don’t interfere with each 
other, the flowing doesn’t interfere with the stillness, the stillness doesn’t
interfere with the flow. 
This analogy is another way of speaking about ‘reaching the end of the 
world’ because we are learning to recognize ‘the world’ as, specifically, the

57
REALITY
world of our own experience. Then, rather than taking refuge in the world, 
wanting our experience to be a particular way we like – ‘I want to hear 
these sounds and I want to have these flavours, I want to see these colours 
and shapes and not those ones’ – we see it all in the context of Dhamma. We 
don’t take refuge in our mind’s version of the world or place an excessive 
value upon that. Instead, what we take a s the refuge, the foundation of our 
life, of our perspective, is that quality of awareness, that awakened awareness, transcendent nowing or vijjā. This is where the world ends, in vijjā.
•  •  • 
Insight meditation, vipassanā meditation, is all about the clarifying of that 
quality of vijjā or one can call it mindfulness ( sati) conjoined with wisdom 
(paññā), sati-paññā. The establishing of that quality in the heart and the 
training of the heart to be that very knowing, to embody that quality of 
awakened awareness, is to truly take refuge in the Buddha – representing 
awakened awareness. This element of knowing, vijjā-dhātu, is aware of 
the flow of liking, disliking, happiness, unhappiness, comfort, discomfort, 
praise, criticism, gain, loss, etc. but is itself unlimited, unburdened by 
them. The heart is taking refuge in that quality of knowing, which is an 
ever present, timeless attribute. When that is established, in the midst of 
activity there is an unshakeable still ness and peace, a spaciousness and a 
freedom from becoming. As Luang Por Sumedho said to me that day, ‘There’s 
nobody going anywhere; there are just conditions changing.’ What he was

58
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
pointing to is that, if we take refuge in that quality of awareness, even as 
our feet are carrying us through the English countryside, all the way up 
to Northumberland, nobody’s going anywhere. The mind is not creating 
a solid ‘world’ out there or a solid ‘I’ who’s the experiencer of it. There is 
a quality of ease and stillness and spaciousness, even as the whole 10,000 
things arise and pass through that sphere of awareness and experience. 
Another image that Ajahn Chah used to describe this principle was that of 
oil and water together in a bottle. He would say that we often think of the 
mind and its objects being one thing. We say, ‘I feel happy,’ ‘I feel unhappy,’ 
‘I’m uncomfortable,’ ‘I’m comfortable,’ ‘I’m going to Bangkok’ or ‘I’m going 
to London,’ in a very matter of fact way. We talk about what and who we 
are, and what we’re doing, and how we feel; the ordinary everyday way we 
speak about such things is automatic for pretty much all of us. This is the 
quotidian habit of speech and thinking. 
Luang Por Chah would point out that we speak and think and understand 
in this way because of ignorance, because of not seeing clearly, avijjā. In 
truth that quality of awareness is not inextricably tied to our emotions. 
It’s not tied to our perceptions, what we see, hear, smell, taste or touch, 
but because of the habits of attachment and the agitation of our lives – 
the busy-ness of self-view, ‘me’ doing something, ‘me’ being this person, 
‘me’ going somewhere – through that agitation, we mix up that quality of

59
REALITY
knowing with the flow of perceptions and feelings, so identification and 
clinging happens and it seems like one thing – ‘me’. 
It’s like having oil and water together in a bottle, or oil and vinegar in a salad 
dressing. If you keep shaking the bottle vigorously, the oil and the water 
seem like one liquid. It really seems like ‘I’m going’, ‘I’m coming’, ‘I’m feeling 
happy’, ‘I’m feeling unhappy’, ‘I’m comfortable,’ ‘I’m uncomfortable’, ‘I’m 
sick’, ‘I’m healthy’. That seems automatic. Yet, if the bottle is put down the 
oil and water separate, quite on their own. You don’t have to do anything to 
the oil and the water to make them part. They do it by themselves because 
they are immiscible, their natures are different. 
It is exactly the same with the mind, if we just put it down, set the bottle 
of our life down, if we stop agitating it, then awareness and the objects 
of awareness naturally separate out from each other. We don’t have to do 
anything special, we just stop creating the causes for self-view, grasping, 
identification, attachment and agitation. If we stop creating the causes for 
ignorance and self-view, feeding the ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’ habits, and we 
set the bottle down, the oil and the water separate out, awareness and the 
objects of awareness separate out – and the heart embodies the quality of  
loka-vidhū, ‘knower of the world’.
If we are in a public situation and a phone starts ringing, we can notice 
what we hear, plus the feeling of embarrassment if it’s our phone that has

60
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
just gone off; the feeling of gratitude mixed with anxiety if it wasn’t, ‘I’m 
glad that wasn’t me, phew! Oh, I’d better check my phone too!’ That’s a 
feeling, an emotion: the feeling of relief that it wasn’t you; the feeling of 
embarrassment that it was you. In this moment, there’s thinking, feeling, hearing, seeing, arising, passing away. In this very moment we can 
recognize that these are just patterns of consciousness arising and taking 
shape within the field of awareness, and that which knows the pattern of 
this moment, that which knows the world, is not limited by that world; that 
which knows the body, does not have a body; that which knows emotions, 
is not an emotion; that which knows thought, isn’t a thought; that which 
knows the person, is not a person.
This might be a fairly challenging proposition, but we do habitually take 
the feeling of being a person to be absolutely real: ‘I’m a person’, ‘I’m a 
woman’, ‘I’m a man’, ‘I’m a monk’, ‘I’m a lay person’, ‘I’m young’, ‘I’m old’, 
‘I’m tall’, ‘I’m short’ – all these ‘I am’s’ that are habitually created. In that 
moment of putting the bottle down and looking, knowing, awakening the 
mind to the present experience, in that moment, there’s the awareness of 
feeling, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, arising, passing away. 
In that moment, awareness is one thing and the objects of awareness are 
another. The process of vipassanā meditation and the development of 
reflective wisdom allows us to put the bottle down and let those qualities

61
REALITY
separate out from each other, so that the awareness becomes unentangled 
from the objects of awareness and is realized to be free from them. 
Another sutta that Luang Por Sumedho is very fond of is also from the text 
of the Udāna, close to the one quoted above. The Buddha said:
There is the Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated, Unformed. If there was 
not the Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated, Unformed, then freedom 
from the world of the born, the originated, the created, the formed 
would not be possible. But since there is the Unborn, the Unoriginated, 
the Uncreated, the Unformed, therefore is freedom possible from the 
world of the born, the originated, the created and the formed.
(Ud 8.3)
The quality of awakened awareness is that which is liberated from the 
formed, the created, the originated. What is liberated is the ‘heart’ that is 
awake, that is aware, and the realization of that is a possibility, a living seed 
within us. •  •  • 
Going back to Dwayne Hoover and his sociopathic misinterpretation of 
‘I’m the only real being in the universe, and everyone else is a zombie or a 
robot and doesn’t really count,’ we might worry that, ‘If I take refuge in this 
awareness, does that mean I will get dissociated from everything that I feel? 
Is this trying to disconnect from the living world and not care about it? Am I

62
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
supposed to abstract the mind from the perceptual world and nullify other 
people? Am I to see my family as mere saṅkhāras, arising and passing away?’ 
When it’s your little son’s birthday and he’s waiting for his present, do you 
just say, ‘All saṅkhāras arise and pass away, you arose, so, you’ll pass away 
one day’? Sometimes, people think like that, misinterpreting the teachings 
about non-attachment and emptiness.
The Buddha does indeed encourage the understanding that the world is 
intrinsically empty and that recognizing that the world is empty is what 
frees the heart from the bonds of birth and death. That’s what the Buddha 
said to the young student Mogharāja:
See the world as empty, Mogharāja and the Lord of Death will not
find you. (SN 1118-9)
People can, however, easily misinterpret these principles and practices to 
mean that we should abstract this awareness, in order to be awake, and 
that everything else doesn’t really count. As if to say, ‘I should dismiss the 
conditioned world as valueless, switch off, and make the aware mind fully 
dissociated and disconnected.’ That is a kind of letting go but it’s a deluded 
version of letting go, in terms of the Buddha’s teaching. 
If we follow the path of the Buddha and apply the teachings in a full way, 
integrated with the Dhamma, then along with that disentanglement,

63
REALITY
letting go of self-view and self-centred conceit in relationship to the world, 
we find that, mysteriously, its partner is a profound attunement to the 
world. I like to use the term ‘unentangled participating’. The awake mind 
is attuned to its objects and their changes, it participates, yet it remains 
utterly unentangled.
As the mind disentangles and puts the bottle down, and the oil and water 
separate out once again, they are still in the same bottle, they’re still 
connected. As the heart disentangles itself from its identification with time 
and self and location and people and things, there is simultaneously an 
attunement. It’s hard to describe how it works but in the classical attributes 
of the Buddha we have a very fine expression of this principle. 
The Buddha was a Fully Self-awakened One, a Sammāsambuddha, fully 
enlightened, he was totally liberated and had let go of the world completely. 
He had transcended the realm of birth and death yet, for the 45 years after 
his enlightenment he walked barefoot around Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, the 
Ganges Valley and beyond, living on alms-food and serving the needs of 
the people. He created the four-fold assembly of monastics and lay-people, 
he brought the Dhamma teachings into the world with amazing diligence, 
skill, imagination, patience and resolution. So the partner to his complete 
liberation from the world was his incredible attunement to the world, in 
the form of a radical kindness, immense generosity and an unbounded

64
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
compassion. As we recite in the chanting, ‘The Buddha, absolutely pure, 
with ocean-like compassion...’. There was absolute purity of wisdom in him 
– seeing that all saṅkhāras are empty and all dhammas are not-self – yet he 
used his life and his capacity to think and speak and act as the means by 
which to benefit all other living beings. He was untiring in his efforts to help 
other living beings to awaken from suffering to the joy of the Dhamma, by 
seeing the empty nature of the world. 
Thus the insight that ‘it is all happening inside my head’, as per Harry 
Potter, i.e. that ‘the world is the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind’ 
doesn’t create disassociation or numb our relationship to the sense world, 
indeed, mysteriously, it creates a far more acute attunement, because, as 
Dumbledore put it, ‘Why on earth should that mean that it is not real?’ 
Or, more formally, as the Buddha said in his famous teaching to Ven. 
Mahā-Kaccāna:
‘All exists’, Kaccayāna, this is one extreme, ‘All does not exist’, this is the 
other extreme. Without veering towards either of these extremes the 
Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma by the Middle Way: With ignorance as 
condition, volitional formations come to be; with volitional formations 
as condition, (sense) consciousness comes to be; ... Such is the origin of 
this whole mass of suffering.
But with the remainderless fading away, cessation and non-arising of

65
REALITY
ignorance, there comes the cessation of volitional formations; with 
the cessation of volitional formations, there is the cessation of (sense) 
consciousness’; ... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
  (S 12.15, S 22.90) 
The world is utterly empty, but those patterns that the conditioned world 
is shaped from function in relation to each other in an orderly manner, 
conditioning each other according to the laws of cause and effect, ‘specific 
conditionality’ – idapaccayatā. The Middle Way articulates this relationship 
exactly, the not veering towards either of the extremes of ‘nothing matters’ 
or ‘everything matters absolutely’.
The example I often give is that of a conductor of an orchestra. The 
conductor is not playing any instrument but attends to the whole group. 
They are listening to everything going on in the orchestra and making 
adjustments to their leadership as the music is being played. Similarly, 
the faculty of mindfulness and wisdom is not only transcendent (in 
this simile not playing an instrument) but is also immanent, attuned 
to, and guiding and nurturing the progress of the whole orchestra. 
One of the epithets of the Buddha is vijjācaraṇa-sampanno which translates 
as ‘impeccable in conduct and understanding’ or ‘perfect in knowledge and 
conduct’. Vijjā is the quality of awakened awareness but its partner is caraṇa 
which is action, conduct. So if you have vijjā, without caraṇa, you have got

66
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
the oil without the water. If you have got caraṇa without the vijjā, then 
you’ve got the water without the oil. 
When we let the world go, we can care about it completely but that caring 
is non-possessive; it doesn’t bring any quality of stress or burden. The 
Buddha was teaching in a society that was antithetical to his perspective: 
he denounced the caste system; he talked about Nibbāna and the ending 
of rebirth, thus rejecting the dominant understanding of spiritual 
development; he rejected classical gender roles and established an order of 
renunciant women, apparently for the first time in India... So he had huge 
tasks on his hands! Yet, at no place in the  suttas is there any hint that the 
Buddha was stressed or burdened by the enormous tasks he had taken on. 
He just did what was necessary and his heart remained peaceful. 
This is a wonderful example for us in our daily lives. Whether we happen to 
be a schoolteacher or running a business, whether we are a child or retired, 
or a doctor or running Amaravati monastery – the Buddha’s engagement 
with the world offers a good example for all of us. The more that we can 
embody the transcendent quality of awareness, the more the heart can 
relate to the world in a skilful way. 
One way that this change of relationship manifests, is in a growing respect 
for the different perspectives of others. How could your version of the

67
REALITY
world be the same as mine? Of course, how could that be? Thus there 
is humility, regard for other beings and we’re able to harmonize
much more easily.



Let the Citta Paint a Picture –
Poetry and Art in
Dhamma Practice
The theme here is exploring artistic expression in terms of Dhamma practice, 
how it functions in our lives and in our religious study and inspiration. This 
is an area I’ve been involved in, to some degree in the past, and it seems a 
valuable and interesting subject to explore. 
Most of us in the West think of practising the Dhamma as comprised of 
going on meditation retreats, listening to talks, studying the scriptures, 
engaging in compassionate charitable work or joining in pūjās, and we 
don’t really think of artistic expression as being very closely involved with 
Dhamma – at least not in the Southern Buddhist tradition. But if you look 
at the Pali scriptures there is a lot of poetry there; even though one might 
think that Dhamma poetry might be something that is a product of the 
modern age, the truth is far from that.

70
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
First of all there was a monk called Vaṅgīsa, who lived in the time of the 
Buddha, and who had been a professional poet before he entered the 
Sangha. In his own verses, describing his life before meeting the Buddha 
and becoming a devotee, he described himself as, ‘Drunk on poetry, I 
wandered around from village to village, from town to town’ (S 8.12). He 
was absorbed in that world. In the scriptures there is a whole section of 
‘The Connected Discourses’ about Vaṅgīsa. Very often in those discourses 
there are dialogues where Vaṅgīsa declares, ‘An inspiration has occurred to 
me, Blessed One. An inspiration has occurred to me, Fortunate One,’ when 
speaking to the Buddha. The Buddha notably doesn’t say to Vaṅgīsa, ‘Stop 
it with the poetry, Vaṅgīsa. Get on with your practice.’ Rather he says, ‘Give 
your inspiration expression, Vaṅgīsa.’ That’s what he says. ‘Speak up. Let 
us all hear it. What is it that your mind has come up with?’ Right there you 
have the Buddha actually encouraging one of his disciples to get poetic. 
That’s the medium Vaṅgīsa was familiar with and the Buddha’s style was to 
let him use that as a skilful means, an upāya, rather than to discourage him 
from that as if it was automatically an indulgence or a delusional act.
In one of those exchanges (in the Vaṅgīsa Saṃyutta  in ‘The Connected 
Discourses’) the Buddha asks Vaṅgīsa, ‘Did you think these verses through 
beforehand? Or did they occur to you spontaneously?’ Vaṅgīsa replied, 
‘These occurred to me spontaneously, Venerable Sir.’ And the Buddha said,

71
REALITY
‘In that case let some more verses come to you spontaneously’ (S 8.8). So he 
comes up with some more. 
I feel it’s important to recognize that the Buddha encouraged versifying, 
he was supportive of it as a medium. Also, and even more importantly, 
there are a lot of the scriptures that are comprised of the Buddha’s own 
spontaneously created poetry. The Dhammapada – which is probably 
the most widely quoted section of the scriptures that we have in the 
Theravāda, the Southern Buddhist tradition – is all poems written by 
the Buddha, similarly the Sutta Nipāta ; these collections of the Buddha’s 
teachings are in poetic form and seemingly they were all verses that were 
made up by the Buddha on the spot. He didn’t sit in his kuṭī and think, 
‘How do I find a rhyme for that? How can I make this scan?’ Rather, 
spontaneous versifying was an art form that existed in the Buddha’s 
time that was apparently part of one’s education, and the Buddha was
particularly good at it.
The Buddha’s poetry is very much a part of our lives today. When we recite 
passages in our daily pūjās, or for special ceremonies, for example the Karaṇīya 
Mettā Sutta, ‘The Buddha’s Words on Loving-Kindness’, we should appreciate 
that that’s a poem the Buddha composed more than 2500 years ago. We have 
translated that into English, and probably many readers are familiar with
it, in both languages:

72
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
This is what should be done 
By one who is skilled in goodness 
And who knows the path of peace 
Let them be able and upright,
Straightforward and gentle in speech,
Humble and not conceited,
Contented and easily satisfied,
Unburdened with duties and frugal in their ways.
Peaceful and calm and wise and skilful,
Not proud or demanding in nature.
Let them not do the slightest thing
That the wise would later reprove.
Wishing: In gladness and in safety,
May all beings be at ease.
Whatever living beings there may be;
Whether they are weak or strong, omitting none,
The great or the mighty, medium, short or small,
The seen and the unseen,
Those living near and far away,
Those born and to-be-born —
May all beings be at ease! (SN 143-47)

73
REALITY
Poetry can thus be seen to be a form of expression that has come down 
to us as a way of skilfully encapsulating the essential teachings, as well as 
rendering them more easy to recollect and recite.
A substantial proportion of the core teachings are in verse form. The Sutta 
Nipāta, which is where the Mettā Sutta  is found, is even more extensive 
in size than the Dhammapada. In addition, in many other collections of 
teachings such as ‘The Long Discourses’, ‘The Middle Length Discourses’ and 
‘The Connected Discourses’, there are many verses included along the way.
When I was once speaking with Bhikkhu Bodhi, the eminent translator, 
with respect to Pali poetry, he said that it is very difficult to translate 
because of the way the words are put together. Just like within, say, English 
poetry, sometimes words are elided or abbreviated in strange ways, or you 
have archaic expressions or weird word orders to make the rhythm of the 
sounds work – it’s just the same in Pali. Thus translating Pali poetry can be 
challenging. In fact, he said, when he was asked to translate the Saṃyutta 
Nikāya, ‘The Connected Discourses’ he deliberately didn’t start with the 
first two chapters, the Devatā Saṃyutta and the Devaputta Saṃyutta because 
it’s almost all poetry. He said, ‘If I had started with those two books, I would 
never have finished it, because it’s such hard work. It’s so difficult I would 
have given up.’ If you look at his translation, the notes for the translations 
of the Pali poetry go over pages and pages, discussing exactly how he chose 
a particular formulation. He said he cunningly translated the roughly 1500

74
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
pages of prose material first. Once he had done so much of that, then he 
couldn’t back out. By the time he got to the end, all that was left was to do 
the 75 pages of poetry. He said to himself, ‘OK, I have to do it now, because I 
have done 98% of the rest of this whole massive collection. I can’t back out.’ 
When we reflect on this area, on poetry and art in Dhamma practice, I thus 
think it’s important to appreciate that it’s there within the medium right 
from the very beginning; it is something that is a skilful means of conveying 
the teaching. In this respect, I feel that this form, even though it’s not very 
common in the Western world and is perhaps seen as supplementary, 
is very much a part of our tradition and it informs our way of speaking, 
and not just in terms of poetry but also that of storytelling. We might not 
think of the Pali Canon as having a lot of compelling stories, ripping yarns, 
heart-breaking dramas or being a medium of much fabulating, but there 
are countless inspiring, illuminating or sobering, or hilarious vignettes 
scattered throughout.
•  •  • 
The collections like the Jātaka, the stories of the Buddha’s previous births, 
and ‘The Dhammapada Commentary’, were composed apparently well after 
the Buddha’s time, so they are not in such a repetitious form as you find the 
suttas. They have an easier narrative flow and the language is much more 
varied. An abundant wealth of stories is to be found there. I’ve learned a 
lot going through the Jātaka stories and ‘The Dhammapada Commentary’.

75
REALITY
Again, most people who are interested in meditation in the West, or in 
the essential teachings of the Buddha, if the subject comes up, they will 
say to me, ‘You read the Jātakas, really?’ I often reply, ‘Yes, and I’ve read 
all of them.’ They’ll say, ‘What? Like all of them?’ I say, ‘From beginning 
to end, all 547 of them.’ Similarly with ‘The Dhammapada Commentary’. 
People ask, ‘You can actually get through all of that stuff?’ Even many of 
my fellow monastics are a bit incredulous! However, I find that there are 
abundant and meaningful  archetypal motifs in these texts; there’s a lot of 
value in these stories. Much of the material that appears in those particular 
collections is a compendium of the Indian folklore of the Buddha’s time. 
Many of these ancient stories were adopted and then had characters from 
the Buddha’s life story grafted into them as the dramatis person æ. These 
have now come down to us as part of the inheritance of the Buddha-sāsana. 
Just as, in later years, in Æ sop’s Fables in Greece, or La Fontaine’s Fables 
in Europe, they inherited stories from before, from earlier generations, 
taking the same stories but with different characters woven into them, 
and sometimes bearing different messages. I feel these are very useful and 
relevant to our lives. The reason why these stories get passed on – like the 
stories of Greek myths or Roman myths or Egyptian or Norse myths, and 
other fairy tales – is because they provide a pertinent map for our lives. 
They can be something that is very informative and valuable to us. They are 
things that we can relate to.

76
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Returning to the Pali scriptures: along with Vaṅgīsa as a poet and with 
the Buddha’s own poetry there are tw o other very significant collections: 
the Therīgāthā, the verses of the enlightened nuns and the Theragāthā, the 
verses of the enlightened monks, which are again all in verse form, with 
some prose commentary. These tales of the Great Elders, both female and 
male, are a particularly rich and potent lode. In these books the founders 
of our tradition tell their life stories in poetic form. The verses summarize 
their lives, their travails and triumphs, and the main lessons they have 
learnt, all in poetic form. It is put into that structure as a way of carrying 
the meaning and the flavour of those aspects of the Elders’ lives; the poetic 
voice conveys an emotional tone that lifts the heart. Interestingly, Vaṅgīsa 
is accorded the honour of having his verses included as the final entry in 
the 264 poems of the Theragāthā, after such great Arahants as Sāriputta, 
Ānanda, Mahā-Kassapa and Mahā-Moggallā na.
There are many different resources where one can find these stories these 
days. In English you have a collection called The Great Disciples of the Buddha  
by Hellmuth Hecker and Ven. Nyanaponika Thera, which has a lot of the 
classical stories and some of the poetry in it. There is also First Buddhist 
Women: Poems and Stories of Awakening by Susan Murcott, this has translations 
and commentary on the Therīgāthā, the verses of the enlightened nuns.

77
REALITY
As one example, here are the verses of Paṭacārā, who was one of the great 
enlightened nuns. As a lay person, her husband and her two children had 
all died in tragic circumstances on the same day and then she heard that 
her parents and her brother had all just died too. She had met the Buddha 
soon after this great loss of her family, in sudden and tragic ways. She was 
very distressed and distraught. She met the Buddha and went forth as a 
nun. In these verses she talks about her struggles, her effort to work with 
her mind, to train herself, and how liberating insight arose.
These are her verses:
When they plough their fields 
and sow seeds in the earth,
when they care for their wives and children, 
young brahmins find riches. 
But I’ve done everything right 
and followed the rule of my teacher. 
I am not lazy or proud. 
Why haven’t I found peace? 
She is comparing her own internal process to people who work the land, 
they make their efforts and they get their results. ‘I have been working 
hard as a nun, I have been trying to train my mind, how come I haven’t 
arrived at peacefulness yet?’ Then she describes this incident:

78
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Bathing my feet, 
I watched the bathwater 
spill down the slope. 
I concentrated my mind
the way you train a good horse. 
Then I took a lamp,
and went into my cell, 
checked the bed, 
and sat down on it.
I took a needle 
and pushed the wick down.
When the lamp went out, 
my mind was freed.
  (Thig 112-16) Susan Murcott trans.
In this way she recollects how she thought during her early monastic 
training – her struggles and her frustration following her going forth: ‘How 
come?! They do their work, they get their results. How come I am working 
really hard and I haven’t got my results?’ She evokes her own struggle and 
then the pivotal, central event of her life, the moment of full realization, 
that manifested from something as simple as coming back to her kuṭī and 
washing the mud off her feet with a jug of water. Then watching the water

79
REALITY
flow down the slope, then going into her kuṭī and putting out the candle 
using a needle to douse the flame. Nothing much, in its own right – the flame 
of a candle going out – but her mind was ripe for liberation and the fruit fell 
from the tree, her mind was completely released from greed, hatred and 
delusion. Additionally, another meaning of N ibbāna is ‘extinction’ as in the 
going out of a flame.
If you are interested in Buddhist poetry, then these verses of the 
enlightened monks and nuns can be a rich source of inspiration. They tell a 
lot of the stories, the backgrounds of the different people, and this book by 
Susan Murcott is particularly good, it is very readable poetry. Sometimes 
the translations into English of Pali poetry endeavour to be very accurate 
but they can end up clunky and unreadable to the unpractised eye. They 
might stay true to the letter of the Pali but they don’t make the heart sing. 
Sometimes the real meaning and flavour of the poetry is lost in the effort 
to be accurate, like a living plant or animal that has been dissected, then 
reassembled – one glance reveals that this is thoroughly dead. As Bhikkhu 
Bodhi said, translating Pali poetry is really tough because you need to carry 
the flavour, the spirit of it as well as being true to the meaning. Often the 
beauty, value and power of poetry lies in the non-logical allusions, the 
alliterations, the hints of association and familiar cultural features, puns 
and double meanings that are unconveyable in another language. For 
example, a verse in the Dhammapada runs:

80
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
The man who is without blind faith,
who knows the Uncreated, 
who has severed all links, destroyed all causes
(for karma, good and evil), 
and thrown out all desires – 
he, truly, is the most excellent of men. 
  (Dhp 97) Buddharakkhita trans. 
The Pali of this verse presents a series of puns, and if the ‘underside’ of each 
pun were to be translated, the verse would read thus:
The man who is faithless, ungrateful, 
a burglar, who destroys opportunities 
and eats vomit – 
he, truly, is the most excellent of men.
Or it can be that a poem is intended to evoke a mood, or a tone, and does not 
aim to ‘mean’ any precise thing, as in many of the works of e. e. cummings, 
such as these lines from ‘anyone lived in a pretty how town’:
and only the snow can begin to explain
how children are apt to forget to remember
•  •  • 
When Amaravati was first opened in 1984 the verse that Ajahn Sumedho 
would often quote, and which almost became a motto for Amaravati (the 
name of which means ‘T he Deathless Realm’) was:

81
REALITY
Mindfulness is the path to the Deathless, 
heedlessness is the path to death. 
The mindful never die, 
the heedless are as if dead already. 
  (Dhp 21)
The commentary, the background story to that four line verse is extremely 
long. It tells the story of Queen Samāvatī who was the wife of King 
Udena, ruler of the Kingdom of Vaṃsa. The King was also married to 
another woman called Māgandiyā. Māgandiyā became very jealous of the 
prominence that Samāvatī had. To cut a very long story short, at a certain 
point Māgandiyā conspired to lock Queen Samāvatī and all of her court 
women in a palace building, to seal the doors and then set the whole place 
on fire. Since Samāvatī was a very dedicated disciple of the Buddha, she 
gave encouragement to her attendants and friends, as the place filled with 
smoke and flames began to leap all around them. She said, ‘Be mindful, 
don’t wobble. Whatever the reason is that we are in this situation, we 
can’t now escape from it, all the doors and windows are sealed. So don’t 
let yourselves get caught up in distress or anger or hatred but focus your 
attention mindfully on the present moment.’ It is a very dramatic and 
colourful story but it seems to be based on historical fact.

82
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
This one little four line verse from the Dhammapada, thus has a long, long 
story, the whole story cycle of King Udena, to give the background to why 
the Buddha uttered those words on that occasion. It is something that 
really gets your attention, describing how dozens of people were being 
burnt alive yet they had the mindfulness and readiness of wisdom to focus 
their attention and be peaceful in the present, even in such a horrific 
and frightening circumstances. Queen Samāvatī and those good women 
showed that it is possible to focus the mind, and not to harbour hatred or 
aversion, or feelings of anger or revenge and suchlike. The Buddha uttered 
this spontaneous verse (Dhp 21), in response to the news about the fire 
and what he was aware of with respect to the mind states of all the people 
who were burnt: ‘Heedlessness is the path to death. The mindful do not 
die.’ The bodies might die but if the mind is focused on the Deathless, 
if the mind is awakened to the transcendent reality of Dhamma, then 
even though life is coming to an end, the heart can be liberated and the
Deathless can be realized. 
There is a lot in that story. It’s a way of illustrating, in a very memorable 
and powerful fashion, the kind of tragedies and blessings that can appear 
in our lives, these then inform and illustrate the theme to bring it home 
and make it memorable. The four-line verse on its own could seem a bit 
abstract or something remote: ‘Mindfulness is the path to the Deathless, 
heedlessness is the path to death...’ it sounds a bit philosophical, and

83
REALITY
perhaps mysterious or promising – ‘“The mindful never die...” What?’ 
– but if you bring to mind this tragic story and the images of that event, 
the single-mindedness of the people being ready not to become caught 
up in panic or fear or aversion or anger, that shows serious mindfulness. 
That is seriously heedful and it is a living example of how death can be 
transcended. In this way the emotional and inspirational power of the
story permeates those four lines and illuminates them from the inside.
•  •  • 
In terms of Dhamma practice and artwork, there is a lot that could be said. It 
is not much spoken about in the Pali Canon, but in the general tradition the 
stories come down to us. The Buddha’s second disciple, Mahā-Moggallāna, 
was extremely gifted in psychic powers. He could move between different 
realms of existence and he would often go off and visit different heavenly 
realms or ghost realms, sometimes the hell realms, many different realms 
of ex istence, and he would come back and tell stories to the Sangha of 
places he had been and different things he had seen in those dimensions. 
Probably many of you reading this will have seen the classic pictures of 
the Six Realms of Existence (sometimes the Five Realms). There is a large 
circular form, divided up into five or six sections that is held up by the 
ogre-like Mahā-Kāla. Kāla is ‘time’ so Mahā-Kāla means ‘Great Time’. It is 
this commanding entity who holds up the circular form which represents

84
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
a mirror. The symbology of it is that this mirror is reflecting the different 
aspects, and prospects, of whoever is looking into it. 
The six divisions are: 1) the  deva realms, the heavenly realms; 2) the realm 
of the asuras, the jealous gods; 3) the human realm; 4) the animal realm; 5) 
the realm of the hungry ghosts, the petas, and 6) the hell realms, the niraya. 
According to the story as it is told, the Buddha said to Mahā-Moggallāna, 
‘You should paint a picture of these realms and then this picture should be 
placed above the gate of every monastery. When people go to a monastery 
they will thus be able to reflect upon their existence and the way that the 
bhāvacakka, the wheel of birth and death, turns. In addition they will come 
to know the different realms of existence that living beings are subject 
to.’ That story is found not just in the Southern Buddhist world but in the 
Northern Buddhist world too. Whether the Buddha actually said that to 
Mahā-Moggallāna or not, one doesn’t know, but certainly in the Pali Canon 
we have the stories of Mahā-Moggallāna visiting a variety of different 
realms. The mirror/wheel image is ancient and one which is found in 
Thailand, Sri Lanka, Burma, China, Tibet, Japan, Korea, Bhutan, Nepal, 
India... there are slightly different forms, according to painting methods 
and cultural style, but the core image is remarkably consistent. It is thus 
another skilful means, an upāya, seemingly coming from the time of the 
Buddha, through which a central set of teachings was conveyed.

85
REALITY
In temple paintings, carvings and bas reliefs throughout Buddhist Asia, and 
around the world now, the stories of the Buddha’s life and previous lives, 
or the wheel of birth and death, are depicted on the walls of shrines and 
halls and suchlike. In pre- or non-literate societies, where people cannot 
read, such pictures vividly convey a story. You will often have a particular 
tale from the Buddha’s previous lives, from the Jātaka stories: his birth in 
Lumbini as a Bodhisattva; being very skinny and starving as a yogi; the 
enlightenment under the Bodhi Tree; being attacked by the runaway and 
maddened elephant Nālāgiri; teaching Aṅgulimāla the murdering bandit 
who became a disciple and an Arahant; images of the Parinibbāna, the 
Buddha lying down under the sāl trees in Kusināra, and so forth. These 
temple paintings and carvings are a way of encapsulating important stories 
and helping them to be brought to mind. This type of artwork is very much 
part of our living Buddhist tradition.
In addition, in the Northern Buddhist world, in particular in Japan but also 
in China, Korea and Tibet, where the climate is generally not so hot and 
sticky and where paper lasts longer, there is more of a literary tradition and 
graphic artwork and texts that were created a few hundred years ago have 
survived. In countries like Sri Lanka, Thailand, Burma, Laos and Cambodia 
it is very hot and steamy, so palm-leaf manuscripts or anything on paper 
easily gets destroyed by mould and termites – it doesn’t last very long. In

86
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
the northern countries it was cooler and they have had paper printing for 
books for centuries, so artwork could be done on paper or be in a printed 
form to last. Accordingly, more of an artistic tradition has been passed 
down over the centuries in the Northern Buddhist world. I would say it 
is very much a part of that Buddhist life, putting particular experiences 
and symbols of the teaching and ways of practice that are useful to us 
into artistic form. It is something that is very fundamental to us as human 
beings and it is one way of transmitting an insight and understanding, a 
particular vision, across time.
As Joseph Campbell put it, in The Power of Myth: 
Behind all these manifestations is the one radiance which shines through 
all things. The function of art is to reveal this radiance through the 
created object. When you see the beautiful organization of a fortunately 
composed work of art, you just say ‘Aha!’ Somehow it speaks to the 
order in your own life and leads to the realization of the very things 
that religions are concerned to render.
When Ajahn Chah came to visit the UK for the first time in 1977, as part of 
that trip he went up to Scotland. He and and the other monks were staying 
with a student of Ajahn Sumedho up in Edinburgh. On the wall of her flat 
she had a large scroll painting of Bodhidharma, the First Patriarch of the 
Ch’an and Zen tradition, who, according to the stories, originally took

87
REALITY
Buddhism from India to China. It was a very dramatic portrait. It was quite 
old and Ajahn Chah had never seen anything like this before. According to 
some of the monks who were there, Luang Por Chah did walking meditation 
in front of this painting of Bodhidharma. He would pace across the room, 
stand in front of it and look at this somewhat wild-eyed, bearded yogi in 
a swirling robe. He would gaze at it for a time and then turn round and 
walk back, and turn round and walk back and stand in front of the painting 
again. Quite plainly there was some kind of a communion going on across 
the centuries – Bodhidharma and the source of his being, the painter who 
made the strokes, the journey to Edinburgh, Ajahn Chah and the source of 
his being, (and now you, dear reader, imbibing these words). Bodhidharma 
was a very powerful, dynamic carrier of the lineage from India into 
China; according to the legends he was originally from Afghanistan bu t 
had trained in India, and then was moved to carry the lineage to China.
In this encounter there was a painting and there was Ajahn Chah, part of the 
Southern Buddhist tradition. There was a meeting of the two and a message 
without words that resonated through time and across distance, via a 
picture that had been created in Asia centuries beforehand. I remember 
Luang Por Sumedho telling us how Luang Por Chah said at the time, ‘Who is 
this? Tell me. Tell me who this is supposed to be.’ 
•  •  •

88
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Before I came into the Sangha, before I was a monk, I used to draw and 
paint pictures, write poems, and I had the idea of one day becoming 
a writer. Since my ordination I have ended up producing a number of 
books over the years – e.g. you are reading one such right now. One of 
the early ones is called Silent Rain. There is a particular talk in there called
‘The Source of Creation’ with one of my pictures there at the front of it.
In that talk I tell a little story about how, when I was a layman, I had 
literary fantasies. I was a student at London University, doing a science 
degree, psychology and physiology. I didn’t really like science that 
much; I felt more inclined to poetry, literature, theatre and art. But I 
had been shunted into doing sciences because I got good marks in it. 
I had these ideas: I wanted to be a great writer like Kafka or James Joyce, or 
one of those inspiring poets starving in a garret like Chatterton, not starving 
so badly that you can’t hold a pen, but starving enough to be romantic, still 
capable of producing great works but, like Rimbaud, never intoxicated with 
any fame or adulation, ready to walk away. Anyway, during that time, I 
was about 19 or 20 years old, I remember sitting down with a pad of paper 
intent on launching into a grand first effort, thinking, ‘I have some time, 
so... what do I want to say? OK, I want to be a writer. If you are going to be a 
writer, you have to write something, it goes with the territory.’ I remember 
sitting there and eventually realizing, ‘I haven’t got anything to say. I really



90
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
haven’t got anything that needs to be expressed; besides, who am I talking 
to?’ That was quite an insightful moment in its own peculiar way, ‘I have 
the idea of being a writer, but what do I know about? What have I got to 
say that is worth hearing or reading?’ There was a large blank. So I quite 
consciously let go of that idea; rather than wanting to be a writer for the 
sake of ‘being a writer’, or having a reputation as a journalist or a novelist, 
instead, I thought, ‘I will wait until I have got something to say and then 
perhaps it will be worth saying.’ That was a helpful turning point for me. 
After having made that choice to leave the idea of ‘becoming a writer’ 
aside I came across what I call ‘the Roy Jenkins effect’. Some readers 
might remember that Roy Jenkins was a British politician, he was one of 
the original founders of the Social Democrat party and he was the Home 
Secretary at a certain point. He was also quite a well-known academic.
He was the Chancellor of Oxford University for some time. I believe he 
was being interviewed because he had written a biography of Churchill or 
some substantial book of his had been published. The interviewer asked 
him the question, ‘Do you have any disappointments in your life? Is there 
anything that you would have liked to achieve that you didn’t?’ And he said, 
‘Well, anyone who goes into politics in this country has the idea that they 
would like to be the Prime Minister one day. Not mentioning any names, 
but that’s normal. So of course I had the idea that I would like to be PM

91
REALITY
eventually. But then I realized I didn’t actually want to be Prime Minister. 
I wanted to have been  Prime Minister.’ I thought, ‘Well done, Mr. Jenkins.
That is very astute.’ 
I thought that because – in terms of poetry, art, literature, music and 
theatre, or even in the academic or the monastic world – sometimes the 
idea of having your name attached to an achievement is more important 
than the achievement itself. We want to have that feeling of being known 
as that PM, that poet, that Nobel Prize winner, that enlightened master; 
having the reputation, the kudos of being someone special becomes the 
raison, the driving force. I felt it was very insightful of Roy Jenkins to realize 
that. He was interested in having the reputation, having the achievement, 
but he didn’t really want to lead the country. For myself this has been very 
applicable in the area of creativity. Instead of trying to be something, or 
known as somebody who writes or paints or is a poet, rather the attitude 
has been: ‘If something needs to be said or created, say it or do the creating 
as needed – whether somebody likes it or not, or whether they make 
something out of it or not, that is their business. You don’t have to make 
that the focus of what you do and why you do it, you simply do the best you 
can and let the world make of it what it will.’
When I came into the Sangha, I had no intention of writing poetry or 
drawing pictures, or even writing books, although I have got quite a few

92
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
with my name on by now. What I found was that as long as it is driven by 
the need for something to be said, or there is a cause for something to be 
produced, then there is a lot that can come forth. People might say, ‘Can 
you do an article for the newsletter?’ Or, ‘You just did this trip with Luang 
Por Sumedho, can you write about it?’ Or when I did a long walk through 
England in 1983, ‘You are going on this long tudong walk from Chithurst 
Monastery up to Northumberland, you are going to keep a diary, aren’t 
you?’ ‘Well, I wasn’t thinking of it.’ ‘You must! You have got to keep a diary.’ 
That became the first book that I wrote. Tudong – The Long Road North. It was 
because someone said ‘You have to keep a diary.’ ‘OK, I can do that.’ A lot 
of the drawings that I have done in past years were pictures for articles. 
Somebody said, ‘We haven’t got any photos but we need s omething for this 
article in the Newsletter, can anyone help?’ Or ‘We’re producing the Rainbows 
family magazine and we need some drawings. The nun who was going to 
do the pictures is away. We haven’t got an artist, can you do something? 
We are printing next week.’ ‘OK. Give me the articles and I will see what 
I can do.’ What I found was that, rather than staring at a blank page and 
finding, ‘There is nothing to say,’ the needs of the moment would call it all 
forth. Some appropriate picture would emerge or something that needed 
to be expressed would shape itself. The moment calls forth the work of
art or the words.

93
REALITY
Similarly, with respect to Dhamma talks, what makes a Dhamma talk a 
genuine Dhamma talk is that it is an expression of the Dhamma itself, not 
just words that talk about it. We use the term ‘Dhamma desanā’ in Pali for 
a talk. The word desanā is related to the Sanskrit word darśana meaning 
‘appearance’ ‘vision’ or ‘sight’ from which comes the Hindi word darshan, 
used to refer to an audience with, and receiving teachings from a spiritual 
teacher. Thus a desanā is a manifestation, an embodiment of Dhamma. The 
words or silences that comprise it arise from the need of the moment, from 
who has gathered there for the occasion, from the interest of the people – 
that’s what calls forth the particular words and tone of a Dhamma desanā. A 
Dhamma talk is thus also an art work. It is not exactly poetic, usually. It is not 
so unique in visual form but it is an expression, a demonstration, a showing.
I used to write poems quite often. Reflecting on this theme, ‘Let the Citta 
Paint a Picture’, I realized that the majority of the poems that I have written 
over the years were trying to clarify an insight, something I was seeing in 
my conscious life, putting this into words. Sometimes it would be to clarify 
or reflect on the meaning of a dream. If I had had some kind of very potent 
dream, often the poems that I wrote would be based on that, articulating 
events and messages from that. Often the poems would be seeded by a 
single phrase and the whole thing would evolve, usually rapidly, from that. 
The process of publishing The Long Road North , the tudong book was, like 
a Dhamma desanā, similarly an unplanned and organic process that arose

94
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
from the people and circumstances gathered, as well as being a lot of fun 
to do. On the walk we didn’t have a camera with us but a few people we 
encountered did and took pictures. I didn’t do my own drawings for that 
book, but a woman called Nancy Sloane Stanley, who is an illustrator, did 
the artwork for it. I was a very junior monk at the time, I had only been 
a monk for five years before I produced Tudong – The Long Road North , in 
1984. It was a year or two after Luang Por Sumedho produced his first book 
Cittaviveka – Teachings from the Silent Mind. Throughout my life I have tended 
to be a bit precocious, but at least I produced my first book after Luang Por 
Sumedho produced his.
I found myself quite glad to put the book together – not because it was an 
ego-trip for a young monk (I was 27-28 at the time) but on account of the way 
it was called forth, invited. It was also enjoyable because I could be involved 
in every aspect of crafting the book. There was a company called the 
Tyneside Free Press in Newcastle. I had walked from Chithurst Monastery 
to Harnham Monastery in Northumberland and it just so happened that 
one of the supporters of Harnham Monastery was the founder of this 
company, which had been created in order to help people put their own
artwork, posters, poetry and books into print.
I had the diary of the walk in four scruffy notebooks, I had the photographs 
people had given us, and then this fellow, Eric Taylor, of the Tyneside Free



96
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
Press, stepped up and said, ‘Why don’t you put it together as a book at the 
Free Press? You can use the facilities there. We will teach you how to make 
a book, how to draw up all the layout sheets and so forth, the photography 
people can help you with the colour pictures and the design people can help 
you with the layout.’ The first Retreat Centre manager at Amaravati, David 
Babski, was also a typesetter so he helped with that aspect; Nick Scott, my 
walking companion, drew the maps; George Brown gave all the advice on 
design and layout; Sujātā Metcalf did all the calligraphy; and Chris Devine 
was the colour picture master; David Major carved a wooden cover for it; 
Vernon Oldfield bound this to make a single presentation copy.
I didn’t paint any of the pictures but I ended up putting the whole of that 
book together over a three week period in the summer of 1984. I got very 
familiar with the smell of Cow Gum. The cutting and pasting was done 
with scalpels and what was called Cow Gum, a kind of adhesive used 
for fixing the (literal) pieces of text and pictures, maps and calligraphy, 
to the layout sheets. I also became accustomed to the sounds of the 
English cricket team being thrashed by the West Indies, over the Radio 
Three test cricket commentary, that some of the team in the huge open 
plan workspace at the Free Press were very fond of. It was a delightfully 
creative burst but, after it was done, I thought, ‘I don’t want to get too 
ahead of myself, since Luang Por Sumedho has only just done his first book.

97
REALITY
I better hold fire on the literature for a while.’ So it was about ten years 
between that book and the second one.
I started teaching in the USA in 1990 and then went to visit every year 
after that. People there said, ‘You are going to be teaching here for a while, 
Ajahn. We want to have some printed words of yours, some teachings. Have 
you got any books?’ To which I replied, ‘There is the book of a tudong walk 
that I did.’ One or two people had a look and said, ‘Well this is very nice, 
but it is very English. Americans will want some Dhamma talks. Can you 
put some of your Dhamma talks together?’ I said, ‘OK.’ At the time there 
were a few recordings of Dhamma talks I had given, particularly during 
the winter retreat of 1991 at Chithurst, with Ajahn Kittisāro, so I thought 
we could use some of those. Then somebody said, ‘What about some of 
your pictures? You could include some of your pictures too.’ So I said, ‘OK.’
Along with doing some illustrations for the Newsletter or for Rainbows, I used 
to always draw birthday cards for my parents and for my sisters. And then 
Ajahn Sucitto said, ‘Why don’t you put some of your poems in as well, and 
those travelogues you do?’ So I said, ‘OK.’ 
In this way all these elements got put together as a compendium: travelogues 
– of tudong walks in England, visiting Switzerland (during which Chernobyl 
exploded), Northern Ireland in the Troubles, visiting the States for the

98
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
first time and suchlike – Dhamma talks, pictures and poems all gathered 
together as an anthology. 
I should mention that, once in a while, I have been criticized for my poetry. 
Some of my poems are in a modern free verse style while some are in a 
more classical style, with rhymes and scansion. I therefore acknowledge 
that a few sneers and snickers at the rum-tee-tum style have been made – 
having poems that scan and rhyme is perhaps not very chic or appealing 
these days – but if things come out from that energetic inner void of the 
heart in a rhyme, what are you going to do? So, with apologies to those 
whose taste is only for the rhymeless, I thought I would share a few poems 
here, both rhyming and not.
I spent the Rains Retreat of 1981 living down in Devon before there was a 
Devon monastery. There was a couple, Margaret and Douglas Jones, who 
would invite Sangha members to stay at their place. They had a little caravan 
which I stayed in, in the farmyard. I was down there with one anagārika for 
the three months. I was learning to recite the monastic rules so I would 
go out for the daily alms-round, reciting long strings of the pāṭimokkha 
in Pali, up and down the hills through the Devon countryside. Then one 
day, on one of those walks, the first two lines of this poem just sprang
into my mind and the rest followed rapidly after.

My father is a judge of dogs
My sister Katie dislikes frogs
My sister Jane is fond of horses
And mother dear, well she of course is
An angel who is past compare.
And then there’s me... but do I dare
To claim that I am that or this
An ‘I am’ swimming in the ‘IS’ ?
The question is beyond the reach 
Of petty mind for on the beach 
Of senses beat the endless tides 
Of births and deaths, the carpet rides 
Of cherished thoughts and memories 
Of wives and lives and families.
Waves washing in and washing back 
Create a past and future, a sack 
Back-burdening, a being blind 
And gripping too intense to find 
The architect of all their pain, 
The singer of the sad refrain 
Who builds these realms of birth and death –
Inhaling and exhaling breath, 
Inhaling birth, exhaling death.
Self-Portrait
DEVON, 1981

Confused, incomprehensibly bizarre,
Clutching waves we think we are;
So lost that we forget the eye
Of wisdom, which does not belie
The truth of waves and sand and seas
Yet is transcendent over these.
A song of Suchness clear and bright,
The boundless inner peace of light
Whose unremitting presence roars
Oceanic at its shores.
So what awesome space is this 
Wherein the wheel revolves, 
And who the ocean into which 
This universe dissolves?
A subtle thief, the question ‘Who?’ 
It burgles with delight, 
It pockets pain and happiness 
Then slips into the night 
Taking all identity 
And leaving on the light.
Taking petty mind up to that watershed 
Beyond which nothing can be said, 
Where, if words were to apply, 
They would create a ‘you’ and ‘I’, 
A plotter and their plot, 
Abiding at this spot, 
Untouched by anything at all, 
No dust, nowhere to fall.

101
REALITY
It is an interesting process whereby something spontaneously hatches 
and a whole entity takes shape. Here is another rhyming one which is 
also quite old. I was sitting on a bench in front of Chithurst house – this 
was while we were still fixing up the house so it was very much a work 
site – there used to be a wooden bench outside the front of the house set 
to be looking out over the South Downs. This poem birthed itself even as
part of me was trying to stop it. 
It was early spring, I believe, and I was supposed to be on retreat and I 
was endeavouring to be not thinking. As you, dear reader, might be 
familiar with the process: you are trying to meditate, with the resolution, 
‘Don’t think, don’t think, meditate. Watch your breath, watch your breath.’  But 
then, despite all efforts at restraint, this thing popped its nose out of 
the void, like one of the Chithurst rabbits testing the air, and wouldn’t
stop until it had fully emerged.

The lone remaining wall 
Of a long-since fallen house, 
No more inside, no more outside, 
No more trespass for the mouse;
Where a doorway and five windows 
Allow the winds to pass 
Unobstructed as they billow 
Through the woods, across the grass;
Where sun and moon and starshine 
Illuminate the scene 
For all the folk that pass it by 
When wandering in the green.
‘I wonder who the person was 
Who built this mighty house, 
That’s now a bramble garden 
And a home for grub and louse?’
A broken ridge and rafters smashed 
Lie strewn across the floor 
And all that stands, quite ownerless, 
Five windows and a door.
The Arahant
CHITHURST, 1983

103
REALITY
The imagery here draws upon the classical depiction of the wheel of birth 
and death. In this the Six Realms are circled by the twelve links of dependent 
origination in graphic form; the image for the Six Senses is a house with 
five windows and a door. It also refers to the first utterance of the Buddha 
after his Enlightenment:
Seeking but not finding the house builder,  
I hurried through the round of many births:  
Painful is birth ever and again!
O house builder, you have been seen;  
You shall not build the house again.  
Your rafters have been broken up,  
Your ridgepole is demolished too.
My mind has now attained the unformed Nibbāna  
And reached the end of every sort of craving.
(Dhp 153-4, Ven. Ñāṇamoli trans.)
Another area of creative  activity that I have found myself explo ring 
is that of the novel. When I was living at Amaravati from 1985-95, the 
Temple didn’t exist. There was the old Dhamma Hall, some readers might 
remember, which sat where the Temple is now. Back when the property 
was a school it was the school gymnasium. Luang Por Sumedho used to live 
in two rooms at the end of that. One winter time he was due to be away,

104
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
travelling for three months and he said, ‘Would you look after my rooms 
while I am away? I am going to be gone for three months. It is a nicer place 
for you to live and you can look after the rooms, keep them warm and dry.’ 
I was very happy to live in Luang Por’s accommodation. It was much better 
than where I had been staying, one of the rooms in the vihāra, it even had 
its own bathroom! After a few weeks of having stayed there, one day when 
I was looking at his bookshelf, I noticed there was a book that I had never 
opened as I thought it was some kind of Thai chanting book, or some other 
foreign text, because of the script on the spine. Then I realized it was not 
Thai, it was some kind of Devanagari. ‘Why would Luang Por have an Indian 
book? Is that Devanagari?’ I thought. I picked it off the shelf and realized it 
was actually Roman script but crafted in an Indian style. It was an edition of 
a book called The Pilgrim Kamanita and it was both a Thai text and an English 
text, and it had pictures. I started reading and realized, ‘This is a Buddhist 
novel. A Buddhist novel written in 1906 in German and then translated into 
English in 1911, then into Thai in the 1920s.’ 
I read it and found to my delight that it was a great story. It was based 
on the Buddhist scriptures, but the Danish writer, Karl Gjellerup, had 
put it all together as a tale from the Buddha’s time and spanning many 
different lifetimes, as well as many different realms of existence. It was 
a very interesting, touching and beautiful story, very well written, and

105
REALITY
surprisingly faithful to the spirit of the Buddha’s teachings, especially with 
respect to some central principles of Buddha-Dhamma, such as attachment 
to sensuality, the principle of awakening, renunciation and enlightenment. 
I was amazed at how well the author seemed to understand the Dhamma. 
It also contained along the way, as a natural part of the narrative, a large 
proportion of the central teachings of Buddhism. It was a kind of covert 
Dhamma anthology of key principles. 
It was in a type of faux-classical English, with long sentences of about ten 
or fifteen lines, so I spent about four years putting it into more readable 
English and making a section of notes and references so that the reader 
could know where the various elements of the story came from.
That new edition was published in 1999, to coincide with the opening of 
the Amaravati Temple. To cut a long story short, I really liked the way that 
Karl Gjellerup had put the Buddha’s teachings and his own imagination 
together, but I also felt there were some loose ends in the story. Firstly, 
the hero had three children that didn’t even get names in the original 
story. He was married to two different women who, again, didn’t even 
get names. I thought that was a bit of an oversight, and whatever
happened to the children? 
At this time I was living in the USA, at Abhayagiri Monastery, which had 
opened in 1996. Once  The Pilgrim Kamanita  had been published, and we had

106
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
also done an audio book of it (mostly for my mother who was blind) I found 
myself pondering these absences. I thought, ‘Wouldn’t it be a good thing to 
do a follow-up story for The Pilgrim Kamanita , to involve the children and 
somehow bring in themes of life that are significant in America? It could 
talk about racism; it could introduce Buddhist cosmology to the American 
Dhamma audience; it could continue to present pithy themes of the 
Teachings and cast them into memorable stories to help them be retained. 
In addition, I felt that ‘the serial novel’ had become a lost medium that 
could do with reviving, that is to say, publishing a novel one chapter at a 
time, over a series of weeks or months, as Charles Dickens had done.
These thoughts were going on in the background of working with Ajahn 
Pasanno and the community to get Abhayagiri Monastery started – which 
was a full-time occupation – so there was not an urgency to these ideas, yet 
they steadily gathered over the 1999-2004 period. Those few themes would 
arise in the mind, so I thought, ‘Maybe one day I will.’ 
In 2004-5 I was on sabbatical for one year in India, living for the Rains 
Retreat in the Korean Temple at Savatthi. I had a notebook with me 
and, without really planning it, over about a five-day span, the story of 
Kamanita’s children hatched on its own. Just like the poem, ‘Self-Portrait’, 
it hatched unbidden and whole. The seed was the thought, ‘Hmm... so, if we 
have got the three children – the two sisters and the brother, with different

107
REALITY
mothers – then what else have you got?...?’ The thread of the story spun 
itself from that raw flax, over a five day period, so I started writing it down. 
The first five chapters were written in India, and then, once back at 
Abhayagiri, it took quite a long time to craft the whole thing into a polished 
form. We started to release it in 2009, at one chapter per month and then it 
was published in full on the Abhayagiri website when I left America in July 
2010, to come and live at Amaravati. 
After I got settled in on the other side of The Pond the thought occurred, 
‘This book needs illustrations, like there were in The Pilgrim Kamanita ’ – as 
Alice says in Alice in Wonderland, ‘And what is the use of a book without 
pictures or conversations?’ Frances Quail, who was an anagārikā at that time, 
was leaving the Sangha, mostly because of family difficulties. She wanted to 
start life as an illustrator, so I enquired, ‘Frances, would you be interested 
in a small project?’ I was not knowingly misrepresenting the task but it 
became apparent that ‘small project’ was not an accurate assessment. The 
creation of the illustrations, plus the design and typography of the book, 
took several years to come to completion but finally this got hatched too, 
after its long gestation. It is now on the website and in print and circulated, 
titled Mara and the Mangala – The Killer . 
I have used these few examples from my own life here, not out of a wish 
for self-promotion, but since this is where I have seen the creative process

108
HAPPILY EVER AFTER
happening most directly. If you take the examples used here, hopefully it 
can be seen that this theme, ‘Let the Citta Paint a Picture’ can be a valuable 
principle to use in your own life, regardless of how you might rate your 
creative abilities. 
Each of us can work out, clarify, our own insights in ways that are tangible 
and meaningful, and we can learn to put things into a form where the 
needs of the moment are being responded to with sensitivity and energy. 
We might be a person of few words but our medium is music, or fixing 
broken appliances; perhaps dog-training is the field in which we flourish; 
cooking with love and colour might be our thing; or building furniture 
that no human could ever use, but which fills the mind with wonder... As 
long as our expressions come from that bright, energetic, attentive void 
of the heart, irrespective of the medium, then people will be reached 
and will be able to be blessed by what has come forth from us. It might 
be pictures, poetry, stories, how a boat is sailed or how a customer is 
received – there is an infinite range of possible media for skilful expression, 
ripening in a sense of communion, true communication, connection with 
reality. Such a communion ‘speaks to the order’ in our hearts; this is the 
quality of Dhamma-niyamatā – ‘the orderliness of reality’. The realization, 
appreciation, of this inner quality of order and integration in turn supports

109
REALITY
the realization of Dhamma, the fundamental reality – ‘the very things that 
religions are concerned to render’. 
If we can relate to our own creative potential, and our Dhamma practice, 
in terms of the world calling something forth, then offering that up as 
drawn by people’s interest – if it is a way of crystallizing something that 
is formative within us, to make sense of an insight – then those creations 
will have life, they will have value. If instead it is just ‘me’ trying to create 
something because ‘I’ want to be ‘someone’, or if I just like the idea of 
creating something to pass the time, it will never have any life to it; at least 
that has been my experience of how it works. It won’t have that same kind 
of heartful message to communicate.
By way of closing this section, here are a few more poems – non-rhymers 
this time. 
This following poem was written after a dream wherein a great and beautiful 
chestnut mare came and befriended me; at the time a voice said, ‘Her name 
is Udissa, Light.’ It was also named, spontaneously, after a touching Irish 
film I saw as a child.

Always alone –
Udissa,
‘Light’ –
never with the heard.
But
what is that crystal song
an earthly sound of –
silence?
Or is it the first sound
to fall on the Awakened:
the air of gentle rustlings
of bodhi-leaves a-quiver
as, with somersaulting ease,
a breeze
stirs a morning cool in Magadha?
Dawn light
rosy horizon
blue moon
May morning.
Gold is where you find it
AMARAVATI, 1986

Certainty, serenity,
stillness on the razor’s edge,
lends an ear
lets fall a tear
for the faithful Earth –
hear.
Now
around these breathing branches,
filamentiferous interface
of earth and sky
where time meets timeless;
the infinite and bounded kiss
in spherical embrace.
At
this
zenith
of green and cold,
is fluttering the pulse and bud
of toiling, teeming,
restless, emergent, collapsing
fever
but
the silent light
illuminates unceasingly.
‘Who is it?’
hovers in stillness,
the Wonderful,
and
thumb touches thumb
tip to tip.

The turning earth obscures the sun, 
night comes over England. 
Vixens bark, 
badgers trundle out, 
mother calls the children in.
A breath of sleep and then 
a skyful of stars as dawn comes.
Wake! Again!! Begin!!!
Hollow-legged, blinking; 
emergence from oblivion 
and the strange dream-logic 
wherein vague feelings, 
and half-remembered characters 
balloon into huge reality 
then fade 
without a murmur.
Owl-calls echo through the woods; 
dew drips, 
clattering softly on chestnut leaves. 
Pale violet, rose, 
the sky fills with light, 
amethystine.
Sunlight on Water, XII
CHITHURST FOREST, 1988

Venus and the crescent moon 
have given up their sparkle 
to the dawn.
Colour and birdsong 
wash through the hills, 
the dark is over.

It has been so long –
the Master’s body laid so low
like the wounded Anfortas,
guardian of the Holy Grail,
neither quite alive
nor yet quite dead.
The wasted flesh shocks the eye,
the straightest mind is turned;
too awed and stunned by raw impact
to ask the question, ‘Why?’
‘What is it ails thee?’
Stopping at the sense’s gate
the seeker gets repelled –
so, guileless and innocent,
is left to wander wasted lands:
brave, brave, brave
but slowly wise.
The Flowering of
the Golden Secret
AMARAVATI, 1990
WITH MANY THANKS TO 
WOLFRAM VON ESCHENBACH, 
JOSEPH CAMPBELL AND
TREVOR RAVENSCROFT

The one of steadfast mind
trends towards the bright,
circling the holy place
the domain of the Lord of Light – but
‘Who seeks it will not find it’;
so near, yet always out of sight.
Five circles of the sun: despair
and hope pursue each other round –
a sorry pair.
Whomsoever seeks the Grail
must do so with a sword –
hating God, defying Truth
but determined to go on;
for there’s no fixed law,
no formula of knowledge,
that ever could withstand
the power of revelation
of one faithful
to their own courageous truth.
Straight through the middle.
The test is to forget yourself,
and all your cherished goals,
to partake of the anguish
of another.
Straight through the middle
comes at last once more
to place himself
before the wounded one;
via painful passages,
far beyond the bounds
of space and time, causality,
to reach the realm of vision:
to reach the Master’s hut,
the Grail Castle.
‚Oeheim, was wirret dier?‘
‘Luang Por, what ails you?’
The question now illuminates
presumptions we have made...
‘Do not weep for ME!
It’s you who are in trouble.
you think this body’s all there is
to “Ajahn Chah”?’

The veil is pierced –
revelation
of the perfectly awake,
radiant reality
is here.
The wound is healed
transfiguration, peace – no one
whose beauty came from birth,
ever equalled Anfortas
emerging from his sickness
– fleur –
a golden lustre falls upon the scene.
No one ever reached the Grail
not named for it in heaven;
the steadfast one
who holds the middle
now comes to the throne –
thus
here and there
and you and i
at last dissolve,
are
gone.
• • • • • • 
• • • • • • • •

Walking by starlight –
 you are
a world of greys –
 the ultimate reality,
uncertainties beneath the feet,
 your heart
the night
 belongs to the infinite,
rings with life,
 bind it to less,
relentlessly
 it cries for more –
A Spring at the Peak, IX
3RD DAY OF THE WANING MOON,
SEPTEMBER, 1995
BELL SPRINGS HERMITAGE
like the crazed moon dancing
on contorting amber tree-rims,
how could it
do otherwise?

In the presence
of everything –
the wonderful
silence.
• • • 
[later, same day]
In the wonderful
silence –
the presence
of everything.
Rivasyllabalansings, I
ABHAYAGIRI, JUNE 1 ST, 1996
FIRST DAY OF THE
NEW MONASTERY





HAPPILY EVER AFTER
VOLUME ONE • REALITY
AJAHN AMARO
2024 © AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS
AMARAVATI BUDDHIST MONASTERY
ST MARGARETS
GREAT GADDESDEN
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD
HERTFORDSHIRE HP1 3BZ
HAPPILY EVER AFTER SERIES ISBN: 978-1-78432-206-9 
VOLUME 1 ISBN: 978-1-78432-201-4
ILLUSTRATION ‘BEYOND FLIGHT’ BY AJAHN THITADHAMMO 
ILLUSTRATION PAGE 89 ‘THE SOURCE OF CREATION’ BY AJAHN AMARO
COVER AND TEXT DESIGN AND FORMATTING: NICHOLAS HALLIDAY . HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
ANY TRANSLATION OF THIS TEXT MUST BE DERIVED FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH.
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT, TRANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN
ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA PLEASE CONTACT AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS AT
PUBLICATIONS@AMARAVATI.ORG
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE EBOOK AT FSBOOKS.ORG
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
 
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT
HTTP:/ /CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND
THIS EDITION PRINTED IN THE UK, 2024

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit: creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
YOU ARE FREE TO
• Copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format.
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• ATTRIBUTION:  You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license,
 and indicate if changes were made.
You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests
the licensor endorses you or your use.
• NON-COMMERCIAL: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• NO DERIVATIVES:  If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
 you may not distribute the modified material.
• NO ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS: You may not apply legal terms or technological
 measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.
NOTICES
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the
public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions
necessary for your intended use.
For example, other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit
how you use the material.
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the
license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material
in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as
publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.



REALITY
EMOTION
PEOPLE
MONEY
BEYOND
