## Ajahn Chah’s Teaching of Westerners

There is a widely circulated and well-attested tale that shortly before the newly-ordained Ajahn Sumedho arrived to request training under Ajahn Chah’s guidance in 1967, Ajahn Chah initiated the construction of a new kuṭī (meditation cabin) in the forest. As the timbers that formed the corner posts were being put into place, one of the villagers who was helping with the construction asked, ‘Eh, Luang Por, how come we are building this so tall? The roof is much higher than it needs to be.’ He was puzzled because such structures are usually designed to be just enough space for one person to live in comfortably: customarily about eight feet by ten feet, with a roof peak at around seven feet. ‘Don’t worry, it’s not being wasteful,’ Ajahn Chah replied. ‘There will be some farang (Western) monks coming here one day, they are a lot bigger than we are.’

In the years that followed the arrival of this first student from the West, a gentle but constant stream of them continued to enter through the gates of Ajahn Chah’s monasteries. From the very beginning he chose not to give any special treatment to the foreigners, but to let them adapt to the climate, food and culture as best they could, and to use any discomfort that they might feel as food for the development of wisdom and patient endurance, two of the qualities that he recognized as central to any spiritual progress.

Despite the primary consideration of keeping all the monastic community to a single harmonious standard, and not making the Westerners special in any way, in 1975 circumstances arose whereby Wat Pah Nanachat (the International Forest Monastery) was established near Wat Pah Pong as a place for Westerners to practise. Ajahn Sumedho and a small group of other Western bhikkhus were looking for a place to fire their alms bowls, and the forest near Bung Wai village was suggested. It was within walking distance of Wat Pah Pong and had plenty of bamboo for firewood, and there were faithful villagers who were long-standing disciples of Ajahn Chah and would be willing to help out. Ajahn Chah sent them off with a smile and said there wasn’t really any rush to come back.

Within a few days the villagers had built a thatched roof shelter for the group to have their meals and gather for meditation, and to protect them if it happened to rain. A month or so later the villagers were keen to begin constructing accommodation and have the monks settle there. The plan received approval from Ajahn Chah, and thus this special training monastery for the growing numbers of Westerners interested in undertaking monastic practice began.

It wasn’t long after this, in 1976, that Ajahn Sumedho was invited by a group in London to come and establish a Theravādan monastery in England. Ajahn Chah came over the following year and left Ajahn Sumedho and a small group of other monastics to reside at the Hampstead Buddhist Vihāra, a house on a busy street in North London. Within a few years they had moved to the country and several other branch monasteries had been established.

Since then many of Ajahn Chah’s senior Western disciples have been engaged in the work of establishing monasteries and spreading the Dhamma on several different continents. Other monasteries have grown up in Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland, Italy, Canada and the USA. Ajahn Chah himself travelled twice to Europe and North America, in 1977 and 1979, and wholeheartedly supported these new foundations. He once said that Buddhism in Thailand was like an old tree that had once been vigorous and abundant; now it was so aged that it could only produce a few fruits, and they were small and bitter. Buddhism in the West he likened in contrast to a young sapling, full of youthful energy and the potential for growth, but needing proper care and support for its development.

In the same light, on his visit to the USA in 1979 he commented, ‘Britain is a good place for Buddhism to get established in the West but it too is an old culture. The USA, however, has the energy and flexibility of a young country – everything is new here – it is here that the Dhamma can really flourish.’ When speaking to a group of young Americans who had just opened up a Buddhist meditation centre, he also added the caveat, ‘You will succeed in truly spreading the Buddha-Dhamma here only if you are not afraid to challenge the desires and opinions of your students (literally ‘to stab their hearts’). If you do this, you will succeed; if you do not, if you change the Teachings and the practice to fit the existing habits and opinions of people out of a misguided sense of wanting to please them, you will have failed in your duty to serve in the best way possible.’