## One evening in Northeast Thailand...

Night is falling swiftly. The forest reverberates with the undulating buzz of countless crickets and the eerie rising wail of tropical cicadas. A few stars poke dimly through the treetops. Amid the gathering darkness there is a pool of warm light, thrown from a pair of kerosene lanterns illuminating the open area below a hut raised up on stilts. Beneath their glow, a couple of dozen people are gathered around a small, solidly-built monk who is seated cross-legged on a wicker bench. The air is filled with a vibrant peace. Venerable Ajahn Chah is teaching.

In some ways the group gathered here is a motley crew. Close beside Ajahn Chah (or Luang Por, Venerable Father, as he is affectionately known to his students) is a cluster of bhikkhus (monks) and novices; most of them are Thai or Lao, but there are a few pale-skinned figures among them – a Canadian, two Americans, a young Australian and an Englishman. In front of the Ajahn sits a well-groomed middle-aged couple, he in a stiff suit and she coiffed and gold-bedecked – he’s a member of parliament from a distant province, they’re taking the opportunity while he’s in the area on official business to come and pay their respects and make some offerings to the monastery.

A little behind them and to both sides is scattered a sizeable group of local villagers. Their shirts and blouses are worn thin and the skin of their lean limbs is sun-darkened, wrinkled – baked like the poor earth of the region. As a child Luang Por played with a few of those here, catching frogs and climbing trees – others he helped and was helped by in the years before he was a bhikkhu, as they planted out their annual round of rice seedlings and then harvested the fields together at the end of the monsoon.

To one side, near the back, is a professor from Freiburg who has come to Thailand with a friend from her local Dharma group to study Buddhism; an American nun has come over with her from the women’s section of the monastery to guide her through the forest paths and to translate. Beside them sit three or four other nuns, elder sisters from the nuns’ section who have decided to take the opportunity to come over as well, to ask advice from Luang Por about an issue in the women’s community and request that he visit their side of the forest and give a Dhamma talk to their whole group – it’s been several days now since he last paid them a visit. They’ve been there for a couple of hours already, so they pay their respects and take their leave, along with the other visitors from the nuns’ section – they need to be back before dark and they’re already a little late.

Also near the back, almost at the edge of the pool of light, sits a stern-faced man in his thirties. He is half turned to one side, as if his presence there is uncomfortable, tentative. He is a local hard man, a nak leng. Deeply disdainful of all things supposedly religious, he nevertheless has a grudging respect for Luang Por, probably stemming as much from the monk’s reputation for toughness and his powers of endurance as from the recognition that, as religious people go, he might be the real thing – ‘but he’s probably the only one worth bowing to in the whole province.’

He’s angry and upset, sick at heart. A week ago his beloved kid brother, who ran with his gang and with whom he’d been through a thousand scrapes together, went down with cerebral malaria and was dead within days. Since then he has felt as if his heart had a spear through it and that everything in the world had lost its flavour. ‘If he had been killed in a knife fight, at least I could take revenge – what am I going to do: track down the mosquito that bit him and kill it?’ ‘Why not go see Luang Por Chah?’ a friend said. So here he is.

Luang Por smiles broadly as he makes a point, holding up a glass to illustrate his analogy. He has noticed the stark young figure in the shadows. Soon he has somehow managed to coax him to the front, as if he was reeling in a tough and wily fish; next thing the hard man has his head in Luang Por’s hands and is weeping like a baby; next he is somehow laughing at his own arrogance and self-obsession – he realizes that he’s not the first or only person ever to have lost a dear one – the tears of rage and grief have turned to tears of relief.

All this happens with twenty total strangers around, yet the atmosphere is one of safety and trust. For although those assembled come from all walks of life and from all round the planet, they are all united at this one moment and place as saha-dhammika ‘fellow Dhamma-farers’ or, to use another expression from the Buddhist vernacular, they are all ‘brothers and sisters in old age, sickness and death’ and thus belong to a single family.

This kind of scenario was played out countless times during the thirty years that Ajahn Chah spent teaching. It is significant that both in longer expositions on formal occasions and in such impromptu dialogues, the flow of teaching, and those to whom it was directed in particular, were highly spontaneous and unpredictable. In many ways, when Ajahn Chah was teaching he was like a master musician, both leading the flow of harmonious sound and producing it entirely in response to the natures and moods of the people he was with; integrating their words, feelings and questions in the crucible of his heart, and letting the responses flow forth freely.

In any kind of crowd gathered around him, he might use the example of the right and wrong ways to peel a mango one moment, then be describing the nature of Ultimate Reality the next – with identical matter-of-fact familiarity. In one moment he might be gruff and cold to the inflated, then charming and gentle to the shy; he might crack a joke with an old friend from the village and, with the next turn, look a corrupt police colonel in the eye and speak sincerely of the central importance of honesty on the Path. Within a few minutes he might scold a bhikkhu for being sloppily dressed, then let his own robe slip off his shoulder and allow his rotund belly to show forth.

A clever question from an academic type, seeking highminded philosophical discussion in order to display his own acumen, might easily find Luang Por’s hand moving to remove his false teeth and then pass them to his attendant bhikkhu to be cleaned up a little. His interlocutor would then have to pass the test of the great master responding to his profound question through broad lips folded in over his gums, before his clean set of teeth was installed…

Ajahn Chah most often gave teachings at such spontaneous gatherings, but he was also very generous with his wisdom on more formal occasions, such as after the recitation of the bhikkhus’ rules, or to the whole assembly of laity and monastics on the weekly lunar observance night. However, whether his teachings were of the former or the latter kind, Ajahn Chah never planned anything. Not one syllable of anything he taught was ever plotted out before he started speaking. He felt that this was an extremely important principle, as the job of the teacher was to get out of the way and let the Dhamma arise according to the needs of the moment – ‘If it’s not alive to the present, it’s not Dhamma,’ he would say.

Once he invited the young Ajahn Sumedho (his first Western student) to give a talk to the assembly at the main monastery, Wat Pah Pong. This was a traumatic test – not only to have to speak to a couple of hundred people who were used to Ajahn Chah’s high standard of wit and wisdom, but also to have to do it in Thai, a language Ajahn Sumedho had only started learning three or four years before. His mind teemed with ideas and fears. He had been reading about the Six Realms of Buddhist cosmology and their correlation to psychological states (anger and the hell realms, sensual bliss and the heavenly realms, etc.) He decided that this would be a good theme, and he thought through all his ideas and the right phrases for them.

On the big night he gave what he (Ajahn Sumedho) felt was a pretty good exposition, and the next day many members of the Sangha came up and said how much they had appreciated his words. He felt relieved and quite pleased with himself. Some time later, in a quiet moment, Ajahn Chah caught his attention, fixed him with a direct look and gently said, ‘Don’t ever do that again.’

This style of teaching was not unique to Ajahn Chah, but is that espoused throughout what is known as the Thai Forest Tradition, and perhaps it would be helpful at this point to describe the character and origins of this lineage, to give a little more sense of the context from which Ajahn Chah’s wisdom sprang.