## Last Years

During the rains retreat of 1981 Ajahn Chah fell seriously ill with what was apparently some form of stroke. His health had been shaky for the last few years, with dizzy spells and diabetic problems, and now it went down with a crash. Over the next few months he received various kinds of treatment, including a couple of operations, but nothing helped. The slide continued, until by the middle of the following year he was paralyzed but for some slight movement in one hand, and he had lost the power of speech. He could still blink his eyes.

He remained in this state for the next ten years, his few areas of control diminishing slowly, until by the end all voluntary movement was lost to him. During this time it was often said that he was still teaching his students: hadn’t he reiterated endlessly that the body is of the nature to sicken and decay, and that it is not under one’s personal control? Well, here was a prime object lesson in exactly that – neither a great master nor even the Buddha himself could escape the inexorable laws of nature. The task, as always, was to find peace and freedom by not identifying with the changing forms.

During this time, despite his severe limitations, on occasion he still managed to teach in ways other than just by being an example of the uncertain processes of life and giving opportunities for his monks and novices to offer their support through nursing care. The bhikkhus used to work in shifts, three or four at a time, to look after Ajahn Chah’s physical needs, as he required 24-hours a day attention.

On one particular shift two monks got into an argument, quite forgetting (as often happens around paralyzed or comatose people) that the other occupant of the room might be fully cognizant of what is going on. Had Ajahn Chah been fully active, it would have been unthinkable that they would have got into such a spat in front of him. As the words got more heated, an agitated movement began in the bed across the room. Suddenly Ajahn Chah coughed violently, and according to reports, sent a sizeable gob of phlegm shooting across the intervening space, passing between the two protagonists and smacking into the wall right beside them. The teaching was duly received and the argument came to an embarrassed and abrupt conclusion.

During the course of his illness the life of the monasteries continued much as before; the Master’s being both there yet not there served in a strange way to help the community adapt to communal decision-making and to the concept of life without their beloved teacher at the centre of everything. After such a great elder passes away, it is not uncommon for things to dissipate rapidly and for all his students to go their own way, the teacher’s legacy vanishing within a generation or two. It is perhaps a testimony to how well Ajahn Chah trained people to be self-reliant that whereas when he fell sick there were about 75 branch monasteries, they had increased to well over 100 by the time of his demise, and have now grown to more than 300 in Thailand and around the world.

After he passed away in 1992, his monastic community set about arranging his funeral. In keeping with the spirit of his life and teachings, this event was to be not just a ceremony, but also a time for hearing and practising Dhamma. It was held over ten days with several periods of group meditation and instructional talks each day, these being given by many of the most accomplished Dhamma teachers in the country.

About 6,000 monks, 1,000 nuns and just over 10,000 lay people camped in the forest for the entire session. Besides these, an estimated 1,000,000 people came through the monastery during the course of the practice period; 400,000, including the king and queen and the prime minister of Thailand, came on the day of the cremation itself.

In the spirit of the standards Ajahn Chah espoused during his whole teaching career, throughout this whole occasion not one penny was charged for anything: food was supplied for everyone through forty-two free food kitchens, run and stocked by many of the branch monasteries; over £160,000 worth of free Dhamma books were passed out; bottled water was provided by the ton through a local firm, and the local bus company and other nearby lorry owners ferried out the thousands of monks each morning to go on alms round through the villages and towns of the area. It was a grand festival of generosity and a fitting way to bid farewell to the great man.