## Methods of Training

There were a multitude of different dimensions to the way that Ajahn Chah trained his students. Instruction was certainly given verbally in many of the ways already described, but most of the learning process occurred through what might best be described as situational teaching. Ajahn Chah realized that for the heart to truly learn any aspect of the teaching and be transformed by it, the lesson had to be absorbed experientially, not intellectually alone. Thus he employed the 10,000 events and aspects of the monastic routine, communal living and the tudong life as ways to teach and train his disciples. Community work projects, learning to recite the rules, helping with the daily chores, random changes in the schedule – all these and more were used as a forum in which to investigate the arising of dukkha and the way leading to its cessation.

He encouraged the attitude of being ready to learn from everything. He would emphasize over and over that we are our own teachers: if we are wise, every personal problem, event and aspect of nature will instruct us; if we are foolish, not even having the Buddha before us explaining everything would make any real impression.

This insight was also borne out in the way he related to people’s questions – he responded more to where people were coming from, rather than answering their questions in their own terms. Often, when asked something, he would appear to receive questions, gently take them to pieces, and then hand the bits back to the inquirers, who would then see for themselves how they were put together. To their surprise, he had guided them in such a way that they had answered their own questions. When asked how it was that he could do this so often, he replied, ‘If the person did not already know the answer they could not have posed the question in the first place.’

Other key attitudes that he encouraged were the need to cultivate a profound sense of urgency in meditation practice, and (again paradoxically), to use the training environment to develop patient endurance. This latter quality is not one that has received a great deal of attention in recent times, particularly in spiritual circles in the ‘quick fix’ culture of the West, but in the forest life it is seen as almost synonymous with spiritual training. When the Buddha was giving his very first instructions on monastic discipline, to a spontaneous gathering of 1,250 of his enlightened disciples at the Bamboo Grove, his first words were: ‘Patient endurance is the supreme practice for freeing the heart from unwholesome states.’ ( Dhp 183–85, DN 14.3.28 )

So when someone came to Ajahn Chah with a tale of woe, of how her husband was drinking and the rice crop looked bad this year, his first response would often be, ‘Can you endure it?’ This was said not as some kind of macho challenge, but more as a way of pointing to the fact that the way beyond suffering is not to run away from it, wallow in it or even grit one’s teeth and get through on will alone – no, the encouragement of patient endurance is to hold steady in the midst of difficulty, to truly apprehend and digest the experience of dukkha, to understand its causes and let them go.