## The Forest Tradition

In a way the forest meditation tradition pre-dates even the Buddha. Before his time, in India and the Himalayan region, it was not uncommon for those who sought spiritual liberation to leave the life of the town and village and resort to the mountains and forest wildernesses. As a gesture of leaving worldly values behind this made perfect sense: the forest was a wild, natural place, and the only people who were to be found there were criminals, the insane, outcasts and renunciant religious seekers. It was a sphere outside the influence of materialistic cultural norms, and thus ideal for cultivating the aspects of the spirit that transcended them.

When the Bodhisatta left the life of the palace at the age of 29, it was to move into the forest and train in the yogic disciplines that were available in his time. The story of how he became dissatisfied with the teachings of his first instructors and left them to find his own way is well-known. He succeeded, discovering that primal chord of Truth he named ‘the Middle Way’ under the shade of the bodhi tree, beside the River Nerañjara, at what is now Bodh-Gaya, in Bihar State, India.

It is frequently stated that the Buddha was born in a forest, was enlightened in a forest, lived and taught his whole life in a forest and finally passed away in a forest. When choice was possible it was the environment he opted to live in since, as he would say: ‘Tathāgatas delight in secluded places.’ The lineage now known as the Thai Forest Tradition tries to live in the spirit of the way espoused by the Buddha himself, and to practise according to the same standards he encouraged during his lifetime. It is a branch of the Southern School of Buddhism, more commonly referred to as ‘Theravāda.’

As far as the sketchy historical accounts can tell us, a few months after the Buddha’s final passing away a great council of elders was held to establish and formalize the Teachings (the discourses and the monastic rules) in a standardized form of the vernacular called ‘Pālibhasa’ – ‘the language of the texts.’ The Dhamma teachings formulated in this way over the next hundred years form the core of the Pāli Canon, the common basis of a range of subsequent Buddhist schools. A hundred years later there was a second council to go over all the teachings again, in an attempt to keep everyone in agreement.

However, as it transpired, it was at this time that the first major split in the Sangha occurred. The majority of the Sangha wanted to change some of the rules, including allowing the monastics to use money. A smaller group was cautious about these proposed changes. Instead they felt, ‘Well, whether it makes sense or not, we want to do things the way the Buddha and his original disciples did.’ The members of the small group were known as the Sthaviras (in Sanskrit) or Theras (in Pāli), meaning ‘Elders.’ After about another 130 years they gave rise to the Theravāda school. ‘Theravāda’ literally means ‘the Way of the Elders,’ and that has been their abiding theme ever since. The ethos of the tradition can be characterized as something like, ‘For better or for worse, that’s the way the Buddha established it, so that is the way we’ll do it.’ It has thus always had a particularly conservative quality to it.

As with all religious traditions and human institutions, over time a number of branches sprouted from the Buddha’s rootstock. It is said that by about 250 years after the Buddha’s time, during the reign of the Emperor Asoka, there were up to eighteen schools and lineages in India, maybe more, with diverging views of the Buddha-sāsana, the Buddha’s dispensation. One lineage became established in Sri Lanka, at some remove from the cultural ferment of India, where a Brahminical revival – and religious influences from West and East – added to the stirrings of new forms of Buddhist thought. This lineage developed in its own way, with less varied input and stimulation. It formulated its commentaries and interpretations of the Pāli scriptures with a view not to developing new forms to meet the challenge of other faiths, but to adding details to the Pāli texts. Some of these were of the nature of fables, to catch the hearts of ordinary folk; others were more philosophical and metaphysical, with a scholarly appeal.

Out of all this, Theravāda Buddhism crystallized. And despite wars, famines and other cultural upheavals on the Indian sub-continent, the Theravādans have survived to the present day, largely because they had originally become well-established on the island of Sri Lanka, a safer haven than many others. Other Buddhist schools operated there too, but Theravāda Buddhism was continually restored and maintained as the island’s main religion.

The lineage eventually spread throughout South-east Asia as at different times missionaries were invited from Sri Lanka and India; they went out to Burma and later on to Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos, and latterly from those countries to the West. Throughout this geographical dispersion of the Theravāda tradition, the theme of continually looking back to the standards of the Pāli Canon has been maintained. When the lineage has been established in new countries, there has always been a strong sense of respectfulness and reverence for the original teachings, and also a respect for the style of life as embodied by the Buddha and the original Sangha, the forest-dwelling monastics of the earliest times.

This is the model that was employed then and has since been carried on, although obviously, during so many centuries, there have been lots of ups and downs. Sometimes the religion would die down in Sri Lanka and then some monks would come from Thailand to revive it again. Then it would fade out in Thailand, and some monks from Burma would boost it up. So its followers supported each other over the centuries, and the religion has thus managed to keep itself afloat and still largely in its original form.

Another aspect of these cycles, along with degeneration, was the problem of success. Often, when the religion became well-developed, the monasteries would grow rich, and the whole system would become obese and corrupted and begin to collapse under its own weight. Then a splinter group would say, ‘Let’s get back to basics!’ go off into the forest, and again return to those original standards of keeping the monastic rules, practising meditation and studying the original teachings.

It’s significant to note that this cycle of progress, overinflation, corruption and reform has taken place many times over the ages in many other Buddhist countries as well. It is striking how the lives and practices of such luminaries as Ven. Patrul Rimpoche in Tibet and Ven. Master Hsu Yun in China (both of the late 19th and early 20th centuries) are totally in accord with the spirit of the Forest Tradition. Both these great masters chose to live lives of great simplicity, kept the monastic discipline very strictly and were accomplished meditators and highly gifted teachers. They largely avoided the burdens of rank and official responsibility, but inevitably rose to positions of great influence through the sheer power of their wisdom and virtue. This is exactly the pattern of life exemplified by the great forest Ajahns of Thailand.

By the mid-19th century, Buddhism in Thailand had a rich variety of regional traditions and practices, but the general field of spiritual life had become somewhat corrupt, with lax monastic discipline and Dhamma teachings mixed up with confused vestiges of tantra and animism, plus the fact that hardly anyone practised meditation any more. In addition to this, and perhaps most significantly, the orthodox position, held by scholars and not just by lax, unlearned or confused monks, was that it was not possible to realize Nibbāna in this age, nor, indeed, even to attain jhāna (meditative absorption). This was something that the revivers of the Forest Tradition refused to accept. It was also one of the reasons why they were deemed mavericks and trouble-makers by the ecclesiastical hierarchy of the time, and lies behind the obvious disdain many of them (Ajahn Chah included) had for the majority of study monks of their own Theravāda lineage – as well as their refrain that ‘you don’t get wisdom from books.’

It is necessary to spell this point out, or it will be puzzling that Ajahn Chah should have been as negative about study as he was – especially as Theravāda is supposed to have great reverence for the word of the Buddha. It is a crucial point that delineates Thai Forest monastics: the determination to focus on life-style, and personal experience, as against books (especially the Commentaries). One might find such sentiments presumptuous or arrogant, or as seeming to express the jealousy of an unlearned mind for its betters, unless it is understood that the interpretations of scholars were leading Buddhism into a black hole. In short, it was just the kind of situation that made the spiritual landscape ripe for renewal, and it was out of this fertile ground that the revival of the Forest Tradition emerged.

The Thai Forest Tradition would not exist as it does today were it not for the influence of one particular great master. This was the Venerable Ajahn Mun Bhuridatta. He was born in the 1870’s in Ubon Province, where Thailand meets with Laos and Cambodia. It was then, and still is, one of the poorer parts of the country, but it is also one where the harshness of the land and the good-humoured character of the people have led to a depth of spirituality rare in the world.

Ajahn Mun was a youth with a lively mind – he excelled at the local art of mor lam, spontaneously versified folk-song, and also felt strongly drawn to spiritual practice. Soon after his ordination as a bhikkhu he sought out Ven. Ajahn Sao, one of the rare local forest monks, and asked him to teach him meditation; he also had recognized that a rigorous adherence to the monastic discipline would be crucial to his spiritual progress. He became Ajahn Sao’s student and threw himself into the practice with great vigour.

While both of these elements, i.e. meditation and strict discipline, might seem unremarkable from the vantage point of the present day, at that time monastic discipline had grown remarkably slipshod throughout the region, and meditation was looked upon with great suspicion – probably only those who were interested in the dark arts would be foolish enough to go near it, and it was thought likely to drive one insane or cause possession by spirits.

In time Ajahn Mun successfully explained and demonstrated the usefulness of meditation to many people, and also became an example of a much higher standard of conduct for the monastic community. Furthermore, despite living in the remote provinces, he became the most highly regarded spiritual teacher in his country. Almost all the most accomplished and revered meditation masters of the 20th century in Thailand were either his direct disciples or were deeply influenced by him. Ajahn Chah was among them.