## Acknowledgements

All books are the work of many hands, hearts, and discriminative faculties. I would like to express my gratitude first of all to Ven. Tsoknyi Rinpoche: for the opportunity to study under his guidance, to teach together with him and for the foreword he kindly wrote for this volume. Secondly I would like to thank Guy Armstrong, who originally had the idea for this book, both for his encouragement in bringing these teachings into print and for his generous preface.

The talks and dialogues were transcribed by a team of scrupulous and patient people: Laura Collins, Kondañña, Joyce Radelet, Toby Gidal, and Joan Andras. The main, rough-hewn editorial work was undertaken with great skill and vision by Ronna Kabatznick, with assistance from Rachel Markowitz; the fine tuning and shaping of ends was carried out by Joseph Curran. Marianne Dresser kindly donated her services as indexer, while the overall design, layout, and production were taken care of with great expertise and sensitivity by Margery Cantor and Dennis Crean. Dee Cuthbert-Cope lent her meticulous proofreading abilities. The artistic skills of Ajahn Jitindriyā were also a blessing to the project—she provided both the beautiful cover painting and helped formulate many of the elements of graphic design.

Other greatly appreciated assistance was offered by Madhu Cannon, secretary for Tsoknyi Rinpoche in Kathmandu, and by Erik Pema Kunsang, translator and advisor with respect to Tibetan language questions.

Lastly, I would like to make a nod of appreciation, for post facto inspiration, to René Daumal and his unfinished spiritual masterpiece Mount Analogue. The story describes the journey of a group of spiritual adventurers, sailing in a small boat named “The Impossible,” to a hidden island whereon is found the vast and soaring Mount Analogue, which they aspire to scale. It was not until the talks had been transcribed for Small Boat, Great Mountain, and the title decided upon, that I read Daumal’s excellent little tale.