## Glossary

In general, Pali terms have been used when referring to Theravāda teachings and Sanskrit when referring to Mayāhāna and Vajrayāna teachings, except when Sanskrit terms (for example, Dharma) are more commonly used in the West.

Ahamkara the feeling of “I-ness”; literally, “made of ‘I am’”

Akāliko timelessness

Amatadhātu the deathless element; a synonym for nirvāna/nibbāna

Amrita (Skt.) the nectar of immortality

Anāgāmi literally, “non-returner”; one who has reached the penultimate stage of enlightenment

Anattā literally, “not-self”; one of the three characteristics of all phenomena

Anicca impermanence, uncertainty; one of the three characteristics of all phenomena

Anantam infinite, limitless

Anidassanam non-manivestative, invisible, formless

Anuloma literally, “with the grain”; referring to the arising dimension of the dependent origination cycle

Arahant a fully enlightened being

Arūpa-jhāna formless absorption; the most refined types of meditative concentration

āsava the “outflows”; the unwholesome habits of the heart: sense desire, views, becoming, and ignorance

Asurā the jealous gods, titans; one of the six realms of Buddhist cosmology, symbolzing righteous indignation and power combined with violence

Atammayatā literally, “not made of that”; nonidentification or nonfabrication

Attavādupādāna clinging to ideas and feelings of self

Atthi the verb “to be,” implying the transcendent state

Avalokiteshvāra (Skt.) literally, “The One Who Listens to the Sounds of the World,” the bodhisattva of compassion; also known as Chenrezig (Tib.) and Kuan Yin (Chin.)

Avijjā ignorance, nescience, unawareness; one of the links in the chain of dependent origination; “marigpa” in Tibetan

Bhava becoming, being; one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Bhikkhu Buddhist monk; literally “one who sees the danger in samsāra” or “one who lives on alms”

Bodhi tree the tree under which the Buddha sat during the night of his enlightenment

Borupet a bitter medicinal vine, native to Thailand

Brahmā the gods of the most refined realms in Buddhist cosmology

Brahma-vihāras the four sublime or divine states of mind, representing the emotional world at its most refined and wholesome; mettā(loving-kindness), karunā(compassion), muditā (joy at the good fortune of others), upekkhā(equanimity); also known as “pleasant abidings,” although not transcendent in themselves

Buddha-Dharma (Skt.)/Dhamma (Pali) the teachings of the Buddha

Ch’an (Chin.) literally, “meditative absorption”; Chinese for the word “jhana” in Pali and “zen” in Japanese

Chenrezig (Tib.) see Avalokiteshvāra

Citta heart or mind

Cittam pabhassaram akandukehi kilesehi “the heart is naturally radiant, defilements are only visitors”

Deva/devatā celestial beings in the heavenly realms

Dharma (Skt.)/Dhamma (Pali) the truth of the way things are; the teachings of the Buddha that reveal that truth and elucidate the means of realizing it as a direct experience

Dharmakāya (Skt.) literally, “the body of the Dharma”; the unmanifest element of the three bodies of the Buddha, in the teachings of the Northern tradition

Dharmasālā (Skt.) pilgrims’ rest house

Ditthupādāna clinging to views and opinions Dukkha suffering, unsatisfactoriness; the inherent insecurity, instability, and imperfection of things; one of the three characteristics of all phenomena

Dukkha-nirodha the cessation of dukkha; the Third Noble Truth

Dzogchen (Tib.) literally, “the natural great perfection”, “great peak” or “great summit”; Tibetan for the mahā-ati in Sanskrit

Hoti the verb “to be,” implying the mundane, conditioned state

Jhāna meditative absorption

Kāmupādāna clinging to sense pleasure

Khandha (Pali)/skandha (Skt.) group, collection, or aggregate; usually meaning one of the five basic constituents of the mental and physical realm: form (esp. the body), feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness

Kuan Yin (Chin.) see Avalokiteshvāra

Kutī hut, monastic dwelling

Loka world, realm, or universe

Luang Por (Thai) a respectful and friendly form of address meaning “venerable father”

Mahāyāna the “Great Vehicle,” or Northern tradition of Buddhism

Mamamkara “me-ness”; literally, “made of ‘me’”

Mañjushri (Skt.) the bodhisattva of wisdom

Marigpa (Tib.) ignorance (see avijjā)

Mettā loving-kindness, one of the brahma-vihāras

Mind-essence the transcendent, unconditioned attribute of mind

Nahm lai ning (Thai) still, flowing water

Nāma-rūpa mind-and-body; name-and-form; subject-and-object; one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa “Homage to the Blessed, Noble, and Perfectly Enlightened One”; the classic phrase used to open most ceremonies, recitations of teachings, and blessings in Pali

Nandana Grove a pleasure garden in the Heaven of the Thirty- Three Gods

Ngondro (Tib.) preliminary practices

Niraya the hell realms; one of the six realms of Buddhist cosmology, symbolizing states of rage, extreme suffering, and passion

Nirodha cessation; a synonym for nirvāna (Skt.)/nibbāna (Pali)

Nirvāna (Skt.)/nibbāna (Pali) peace, the goal of the Buddhist path; literally, “coolness”

Nyingmapa (Tib.) literally, “The Ancient Ones”; the oldest school of Tibetan Buddhism, keepers and transmitters of the Dzogchen teachings

Paccaya to condition, cause, or affect

Pārami/pāramitā spiritual perfections

Parinibbāna (Pali) /parinirvāna (Skt.) complete or final nirvāna; a term usually used to refer to the passing away of an enlightened being

Patiloma literally, “against the grain”; referring to the cessation dimension of the dependent origination cycle

Peta (Pali)/preta (Skt.) hungry ghosts; one of the six realms of Buddhist cosmology, symbolzing the state of insatiable addiction

Poo roo (Thai) the “one who knows”; the faculty of knowing

Pūjā devotional recitation of scripture and ritual practice

Rigpa (Tib.) nondual awareness; authentic recogntion of mindessence; also known as “the view”; the Pali “vijjā”or Sanskrit “vidyā” are equivalent

Rinpoche (Tib.) literally, “precious one”; an honorific title usually given to lamas deemed to have developed many perfections (pāramitās) in previous lives

Rūpa-khandha the physical or form aspect of existence; one of the five khandhas (see above)

Sabbato pabham radiant in all directions or accessible from all sides

Samana Gotama the Buddha; literally, “the ascetic wanderer of the Gotama clan”

Samsāra literally, “endless wandering”; the realm of birth and death

Sankhārā mental formations; one of the five khandhas; one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Sīla virtue; moral precepts

Sīlabbatupādāna clinging to rules, conventions, and observances

Skandha (Skt.)/khandha (Pali) (see above)

Suññatā emptiness

Sutta (Pali)/sutra (Skt.) literally, “thread”; scriptural teaching

Tan an honorific meaning “venerable friend,” used in Thailand for younger monks and novices

Tanhā literally, “thirst”; craving; one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Tārā (Skt.) literally, “She who carries across”; a bodhisattva who was born from one of the tears of Avalokiteshvāra; she is the wisdom aspect of Amoghasiddhi Buddha

Tathatā suchness

Tathāgata the epithet that the Buddha used to refer to himself; literally, “one gone to suchness and come to suchness”

Theravāda literally, “The Way of the Elders”; the Southern tradition of Buddhism

Trekcho (Tib.) literally, “cutting”; an aspect of Tibetan Buddhist meditation practice

Udāna the “Inspired Utterances of the Buddha”; one of the books of the collection of canonical discourses

Upādāna clinging, grasping; one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Upadesha (Skt.) pointing out, instruction, indication

Vajra (Skt.) literally, “diamond,” “indestructible,” “thunderbolt”; usually refers to the supreme or ultimate aspect of things

Vajrasattva (Skt.) literally, “indestructible being”; a member of the Tibetan pantheon representing the emodiment of the wisdom of all the Buddhas – a highly significant figure in Dzogchen practice

Vajrayāna (Skt.) literally, “The Diamond Vehicle” or “The Supreme Vehicle”; the tantric aspect of the Northern tradition of Buddhism

Vedanā feeling; one of the five khandhas; also one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Vijjā transcendent knowing; true knowledge; see rigpa

Viññāna discriminative consciousness; one of the five khandhas; also one of the links in the chain of dependent origination

Vipassanā insight; insight meditation

Zafu (Jap.) meditation cushion