## Selected Chants

Tibetan chants from translations by Tony Duff and Erik Pema Kunsang

Taking Refuge Theravāda

Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa Homage to the Blessed, Noble and Perfectly Enlightened One (3 times)

Buddham saranam gacchāmi Dhammam saranam gacchāmi Sangham saranam gacchāmi To the Buddha I go for refuge To the Dhamma I go for refuge To the Sangha I go for refuge (3 times)

Ordinary Taking Refuge & Arousing Bodhicitta Tibetan

Until becoming enlightened, I take refuge In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly; May the merits from my generosity and other virtues, Result in Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings. (3 times)

Extra-Ordinary Taking Refuge Tibetan

Namo: The essence, empty, Dharmakāya; The nature, clarity, Sambhogakāya; The compassion, manifold, Nirmānakāya; In that I take refuge until enlightenment. (3 times)

Nāgārjuna’s Dedication Of Merit Tibetan

By this merit may we obtain omniscience then Having defeated the enemies, wrong-doings, May we liberate living beings from the ocean of existence, With its stormy waves of birth, old-age, sickness and death.

Reflections On Sharing Blessings Theravāda

Through the goodness that arises from my practice, May my spiritual teachers and guides of great virtue, My mother, my father and my relatives, The sun and the moon, And all virtuous leaders of the world; May the highest gods and evil forces; Celestial beings, guardian spirits of the Earth And the Lord of Death; May those who are friendly, indifferent or hostile; May all beings receive the blessings of my life, May they soon attain the threefold bliss And realize the Deathless. Through the goodness that arises from my practice, And through this act of sharing, May all desires and attachments quickly cease And all harmful states of mind. Until I realize Nibbāna, In every kind of birth, May I have an upright mind With mindfulness and wisdom, austerity and vigor. May the forces of delusion not take hold Nor weaken my resolve. The Buddha is my excellent refuge, Unsurpassed is the protection of the Dhamma, The Solitary Buddha is my noble Lord, The Sangha is my supreme support. Through the supreme power of all these, May darkness and delusion be dispelled.

Vajrasatva 100 Syllable Mantra Tibetan

OM VAJRASATVA SAMAYAM ANUPALAYA VAJRASATVA TVENOPATISHTHA DRDHO ME BHAVA SUTOSHYO ME BHAVA SUPOSHYO ME BHAVA ANURAKTO ME BHAVA SARVASIDDHI MEM PRAYACCHA SARVA KARMASU CA ME CITTAM SHREYAM KURU HŪM HA HA HA HA HOH BHAGAVAN SARVATATHĀGATA VAJRA MĀ ME MUÑCA VAJRĪ BHAVA MAHĀSAMAYASATVA ĀH

The Buddha’s Words On Loving Kindness Theravāda

This is what should be done By one who is skilled in goodness, And who knows the path of peace: Let them be able and upright, Straightforward and gentle in speech. Humble and not conceited, Contented and easily satisfied. Unburdened with duties and frugal in their ways, Peaceful and calm, and wise and skilful, Not proud and demanding in nature. Let them not do the slightest thing That the wise would later reprove. Wishing: In gladness and in safety, May all beings be at ease. Whatever living beings there may be; Whether they are weak or strong, omitting none, The great or the mighty, medium, short or small, The seen and the unseen, Those living near and far away, Those born and to-be-born— May all beings be at ease! Let none deceive another, Or despise any being in any state. Let none through anger or ill will Wish harm upon another. Even as mother protects with her life Her child, her only child, So with a boundless heart Should one cherish all living beings; Radiating kindness over the entire world: Spreading upwards to the skies, And downwards to the depths; Outwards and unbounded, Freed from hatred and ill will. Whether standing or walking, seated or lying down Free from drowsiness, One should sustain this recollection. This is said to be the sublime abiding. By not holding to fixed views, The pure-hearted one, having clarity of vision, Being freed from all sense desires, Is not born again into this world.

Vajra Song Of The First Tsoknyi Rinpoche Tibetan

Don’t wander, don’t wander, place mindfulness on guard; Along the road of distraction, Māra lies in ambush. Māra is the mind, clinging to like and dislike, So look into the essence of this magic, free from dualistic fixation. Realize that your mind is unfabricated primordial purity; There is no Buddha elsewhere, look at your own face; There is nothing else to search for, rest in your own place; Non-meditation is spontaneous perfection so capture the royal seat.

Suffusion With The Divine Abidings Theravāda

I will abide pervading one quarter with a heart imbued with loving-kindness— Likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth— So above and below, around and everywhere and to all as to myself. I will abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a heart imbued with loving-kindness; abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

I will abide pervading one quarter with a heart imbued with compassion— likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth— so above and below, around and everywhere and to all as to myself. I will abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a heart imbued with compassion; abundant, exalted, immeasurable without hostility and without ill will.

I will abide pervading one quarter with a heart imbued with gladness— likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth— so above and below, around and everywhere and to all as to myself. I will abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a heart imbued with gladness; abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

I will abide pervading one quarter with a heart imbued with equanimity— likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth— so above and below, around and everywhere and to all as to myself. I will abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a heart imbued with equanimity; abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

Aspiration For Bodhicitta Tibetan

May the precious bodhicitta arise Where it has not arisen, And where it has arisen may it not decrease But increase further and further.

Extra-Ordinary Arousing Bodhicitta Tibetan

Ho: In order to set all living beings, as extensive as space On the level of a Buddha, I will use the upadesha of the Great Perfection To realize self-arising rigpa Dharmakāya.

Reflections On Universal Well-Being Theravāda

May I abide in well-being In freedom from affliction In freedom from hostility In freedom from ill will In freedom from anxiety And may I maintain well-being in myself.

May everyone abide in well-being In freedom from hostility In freedom from ill will In freedom from anxiety And may they maintain well-being in themselves.

May all beings be released from all suffering And may they not be parted from The good fortune they have attained.

All beings are the owners of their actions And inherit their results. Their future is born from such actions Companion to such actions And their results will be their home. All kinds of actions, Be they skillful or harmful, Of such acts, They will be the heirs.

Dependent Origination & Cessation Theravāda

With ignorance as condition formations come to be.

With formations as condition consciousness comes to be.

With consciousness as condition materiality/mentality comes to be.

With materiality/mentality as condition the six senses come to be.

With the six senses as condition contact comes to be.

With contact as condition feeling comes to be.

With feeling as condition craving comes to be.

With craving as condition clinging comes to be.

With clinging as condition becoming comes to be.

With becoming as condition birth comes to be.

With birth as condition, then old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair all come into being.

Such is the origination of this entire mass of suffering.

Now, with the remainderless fading, cessation and absence of that very ignorance comes the cessation, the nonarising of formations.

With the cessation, the non-arising of formations comes the cessation, the non-arising of consciousness.

With the cessation, the non-arising of consciousness comes the cessation, the non-arising of materiality/mentality.

With the cessation, the non-arising of materiality/mentality comes the cessation, the non-arising of the six senses.

With the cessation, the non-arising of the six senses comes the cessation, the non-arising of contact.

With the cessation, the non-arising of contact comes the cessation, the non-arising of feeling.

With the cessation, the non-arising of feeling comes the cessation, the non-arising of craving.

With the cessation, the non-arising of craving comes the cessation, the non-arising of clinging.

With the cessation, the non-arising of clinging comes the cessation, the non-arising of becoming.

With the cessation, the non-arising of becoming comes the cessation, the non-arising of birth.

With the cessation, the non-arising of birth, then old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair all fail to arise, they cease.

Such is the cessation, the non-arising of this entire mass of suffering.

The Five Precepts Theravāda

1. Pānātipātā veramanī sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi. I undertake the precept to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.

2. Adinnādānā veramanī sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi. I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.

3. Kamesu micchācārā veramanī sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi. I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct.

4. Musāvādā veramanī sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi. I undertake the precept to refrain from false and harmful speech.

5. Surāmeraya-majja-pamādatthānā veramanī sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi. I undertake the precept to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs, which lead to carelessness.

Leader: Imāni pañca sikkhāpadāni Sīlena sugatim yanti Sīlena bhogasampadā Sīlena nibbutim yanti Tasmā Sīlam visodhaye

These are the five precepts: Sīla is the source of happiness, Sīla is the source of true wealth, Sīla is the cause of peacefulness, therefore, let Sīla be purified.