## Foreword

Ajahn Amaro is a true follower of the Buddha and holder of the teaching lineage of the Theravāda tradition. Though his early life was as an ordinary person, from an early age he was curious about spiritual matters and so journeyed to Thailand. There, through his karmic good fortune, he readily connected with a Buddhist teacher. He received full instructions and meditated there for many years. He has mainly followed Buddhist teachers of the Forest monk tradition; his emphasis has been the “renunciation wheel of meditation practice.”

Amaro’s main practice has been the direct application of the Four Noble Truths: acknowledging suffering, eliminating the origin, realising the cessation, and following the path. These four truths encapsulate the main teaching of the Buddha, and among them—suffering, origin, cessation, and path—in the contemplation of the twelve links of dependent origination the focus is mainly on eliminating the origins of suffering.

I have had a karmic bond with Ajahn Amaro over the course of my visits to the U.S., where we met on several occasions and taught together at Spirit Rock Center in California. I feel confident that he is someone who has thoroughly both studied and practiced the Theravāda path. In addition he has also met several Vajrayāna masters, including Dudjom Rinpoche, and I therefore feel he has an open-minded appreciation of the Vajrayāna teachings.

Seen from my point of view, the Buddha taught what we call Three Vehicles. Each of them contains a complete path for sentient beings to eliminate their negative emotions—desire, hatred, ignorance, pride, and envy—with all their 84,000 proliferations and variations. It is therefore entirely possible when someone practices free of laziness and procrastination any of these three paths to attain the same level as Buddha Shakyamuni.

Moreover, it is possible for any person to practice all three vehicles in combination without any conflict whatsoever. This is often the case in the Tibetan tradition of Buddhism, where many practitioners have practiced the three vehicles either separately or unified into a single system.

In the present time, when we see a growing interest in Buddhist practice all over the world, I find it important that people come to understand the primary emphasis and special qualities of each of these three vehicles. Free of bias, and with clarity, each person is then free to adopt what is closest to their inclinations— whether one of the vehicles alone or the three in combination. I therefore encourage everyone to understand the vital points in Buddha’s three vehicles.

I have found, and deeply appreciate, that among the many current Dharma teachers, Ajahn Amaro is one who respects this nonsectarian principle—and embodies an understanding of it as well.

Drubwang Tsoknyi Rinpoche Putuo Shan Island October 2002