## Preface

As a buddhist monk in the early 1980s, I was living and practicing at Wat Suan Mokkh, a forest monastery in the south of Thailand established by Ajahn Buddhadāsa, one of the greatest Thai meditation masters and scholars of the last 50 years. I had a deep appreciation for the Theravādan lineage of Buddhism expressed in that country and for its profound allegiance to the original teachings of the Buddha as recorded in the Pali Canon.

At one of my first morning meals in the open-air dining hall at Suan Mokkh, I was quite surprised to see nearby, atop a five foot high pedestal, a bust of Avalokitesvāra, the Mahāyāna deity of compassion. What on earth, I wondered, was a Mahāyāna deity doing in a Theravādan monastery? The two schools had split apart in northern India some 2,000 years ago. At that time I assumed, quite mistakenly, that they had never spoken again, like a childless couple after an acrimonious divorce.

Looking around the Buddhist world circa 1980, there was little evidence to the contrary. Zen masters rarely spoke to Tibetan lamas; the Theravādan monks of Thailand and Burma had little contact outside their own countries. The image of Avalokitesvāra at Wat Suan Mokkh was mysterious because it flew in the face of centuries of separation. Even more striking was my discovery of an entire building within the monastery, then called the Spiritual Theatre (shades of Steppenwolf, I thought to myself), dedicated to original paintings and facsimiles of spiritual art from Theravādan, Zen, Tibetan, and even Western sources. This variety very much reflected the open-mindedness of Ajahn Buddhadāsa, whose appreciation for truth ran far deeper than his loyalty to any historical lineage.

But the Avalokitesvāra bust was another question. I was told that it had been unearthed in the last century near the town of Chaiya, a few miles from Suan Mokkh. Its origin, however, was traced to the ninth century c.e. It thus became clear that over 1,000 years ago, Mahāyāna Buddhism had flourished in this region. In fact, historians tell us that Theravāda and Mahāyāna coexisted in Thailand, along with Vajrayāna and Hinduism, until the fourteenth century. After a change in the political sphere, Theravāda began to dominate, as it has ever since.

So perhaps it should not be too surprising that in the modern Thai forest tradition we find an understanding of Dharma with strong parallels to the central tenets of Mahāyāna and Tibetan Buddhism. The Mahāyāna doctrine of Buddha-nature, for instance, tells us that our very essence is an unborn and undying awareness. In a later expression of the teachings through the Dzogchen school, specific meditation techniques have been developed to allow practitioners to recognise and abide in this nature. Ajahn Amaro (whose name means “deathless”) once commented that this specific teaching is the national anthem of the Thai forest tradition.

Ajahn Chah, a Thai master who is considered the head of Ajahn Amaro’s lineage (and the teacher of Ajahn Sumedho and Jack Kornfield), referred often to the “One Who Knows” as a pointer to the inherent wisdom within awareness itself. Ajahn Buddhadasa says that “emptiness and mindfulness are one.” Ajahn Mahā Boowa, a contemporary of Ajahn Chah’s who learned from the same master, Ajahn Mun, says of impermanence: “This vanishes, that vanishes, but that which knows their vanishing doesn’t vanish. . . . All that remains is simple awareness, utterly pure.”

This notion of an intrinsic awareness as an aspect of the deathless nature is generally considered a Mahāyāna innovation. Yet it is found often in the Thai forest tradition as well. Tracing its genesis, one can find hints of this idea in the Pali Canon, the traditional sourcebook for Theravāda, but the references are infrequent and somewhat ambiguous. One of the delights of Small Boat, Great Mountain is that Ajahn Amaro has enumerated many of these references and provided clear and compelling explanations of them. In orthodox circles in Burma and Sri Lanka, however, this notion is frankly heretical, since awareness (or consciousness, viññāna) is considered impermanent.

The issue is of particular interest at the current time. Over the last 10 years, many Western vipassanā teachers and students have sought teachings from Dzogchen masters. Among the Tibetan teachers who have been especially helpful to vipassanā seekers have been the late Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche, his son Tsoknyi Rinpoche, and the late Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche. Having been inspired by the profound view and techniques of this lineage, many vipassanāpractitioners are grappling to reconcile Dzogchen understandings with their Theravādan backgrounds. Ajahn Amaro’s talks as recorded in this book are a very important contribution to this dialogue. As such, a few words about the occasion on which they were given may be of interest.

In the fall of 1997 the Dharma teachers of Spirit Rock Meditation Center (among whom we are delighted to count Ajahn Amaro) were meeting to talk about inviting Tsoknyi Rinpoche to lead a retreat at Spirit Rock. When we invite teachers outside our tradition, we like to pair them with a Spirit Rock teacher in order to minimize the potential for confusion among students who, like us, may be grappling with differences in vocabulary and understanding. We were discussing who might teach the retreat with Tsoknyi Rinpoche when Ajahn Amaro’s name came up. One teacher enthusiastically supported the nomination with the endorsement, “Yes! The tulku and the bhikkhu!” And so it came to be.

Dialogue across different spiritual traditions is fraught with obstacles, even within a shared Buddhist heritage. Over the thousands of years since the death of the Buddha, different schools have evolved in their own unique ways. Typical of the pitfalls was a meeting in the late 1970s between a Korean Zen master and a respected Tibetan rinpoche. The meeting had, of course, been set up by their Western students in hopes of fostering an exchange between two lineages long estranged. The Zen master began with a Dharma challenge. Holding out an orange, he asked forcefully, “What is this!” The Tibetan master sat in silence and continued to thumb through the beads of his mala. The Zen master asked again: “What is this!” The rinpoche turned to his translator and inquired softly, “Don’t they have oranges in his country?” Even today the divisions among different Buddhist schools have hardly mended at all. I listened recently to a recorded conversation between a Western Theravādan teacher and a Tibetan Dzogchen master, through an excellent translator, about some important Dharma insights. The teachers may as well have been from different planets. I found myself first puzzled, then frustrated, and finally amused by their inability to find common ground despite the obvious goodwill of all three parties. They kept just missing one another because of the difficulties of translation in the spheres of language, culture, and Dharma philosophy.

So it was by no means assured that the retreat with Ajahn Amaro and Tsoknyi Rinpoche would be a success. Both are charismatic and assured teachers used to leading retreats on their own. Such a pairing had never been tried before. I wondered if this was the first time a Theravādan and a Vajrayāna teacher had shared the same platform since Nālandā University in northern India, which was destroyed by Muslim invaders in the twelfth century.

There were delicate issues of status to address. Rinpoche generally teaches from a throne, a high and ornate chair meant to convey the high respect that the listener should accord the teachings, somewhat independent of the teacher. Would Ajahn Amaro feel comfortable in a high stand decorated with colorful Tibetan silk tapestries? Or would the Theravādan monk be relegated to the ordinary wooden platform? But this could be problematic because the Vinaya, the monk’s code of discipline, prohibits a monk from teaching if any layman is seated higher than he. The organizers were all relieved when Ajahn Amaro explained that the throne was a common teaching device in his forest tradition and he would very happily speak from it.

Quite contrary to our concerns, the retreat was an unqualified success. As a student at that retreat, I was very appreciative of both teachers. Rinpoche’s daily exposition of the Dzogchen teachings was very skillfully formatted for Westerners, as one can see from his book Carefree Dignity. Ajahn Amaro’s evening talks, as represented here, were a beautiful complement and helped to make Rinpoche’s teachings more accessible to vipassanā practitioners. I sat in awe each night as Ajahn Amaro delivered talks which covered technical aspects of meditation and philosophy, with long quotations from the Buddha’s discourses, without notes. Delivered in a fresh and almost extemporaneous style, it was a virtuoso display. Equally impressive was his overall demeanor. Many of us remarked on his unfailing cheerfulness. Tsoknyi Rinpoche summed it up at the end when he expressed his appreciation for Ajahn Amaro’s part in the retreat: “I’ve never met anyone like him before. His Vinaya is very strict. Usually when the Vinaya is strict, inside, the monk is very tight. But he is very loose inside and always happy.”

In the lineage of Ajahn Chah, a teacher is not supposed to prepare much for a Dharma talk. Rather the teacher is encouraged to trust in his or her sense of the moment and to intuit from the setting and the audience what words are most appropriate. I believe that Ajahn Amaro followed this guideline during the retreat with Tsoknyi Rinpoche, and that we are most fortunate to have this record of the extraordinary talks that the situation evoked. In their erudition, humor, and profundity, they are a unique and accurate transmission of the atmosphere of that special retreat. May their message lead all those who read them directly to their own Buddha-nature and to the vast freedom of the Natural Great Perfection.

Guy Armstrong Spirit Rock Meditation Center July 2002