## Epilogue: 2007

“…go on with your story.”

More than eight years have passed since the time Golden Highways Revisited was written. Many changes have come about in the places and people described: some have died, some have married; some institutions have blossomed, some have crumpled and disappeared.

In order to give the reader a continuing sense of the evolution and flow of these changes, here are listed some of the details of what has come after; they are arranged in no particular order.

Sāmaneras Ñānamuni and Pāsādiko both left the community within the year; the repeated absences of one of their Ajahns (namely moi) being cited as one of the causes. My schedule for the latter part of 1998 was cut back, events were cancelled and, after this time, the community as a whole decided on what invitations were to be accepted or not. Prior to this time it had been my choice alone. A brief tallying of the talks and retreats I gave, and the meetings and ceremonies I attended in the 105 days covered by the journal, should serve amply to show what saying Yes to everything can lead to:

Dialogues and meetings: ~ 68Days leading retreats (i.e. usually at least one talk per day): ~ 47Dhamma talks (not during retreats): ~ 19Ceremonies: ~ 15

Spirit Rock has gone from strength to strength. Their retreats and classes are mostly full but there are still endless discussions about the amount to charge people and how to live as lay teachers within the dāna principle [www.spiritrock.org].

Norman Fischer retired from the post of co-abbot of Zen Center. He now heads up his own small organization, Everyday Zen, dedicated to making Buddhist practices and principles as widely accessible as possible [www.everydayzen.org].

Anagarika Don Sperry was ordained as Bhikkhu Jotipālo at Abhayagiri in July of 2000; after his fifth Rains, in 2005, he made a tudong pilgrimage, with a lay companion, Austin Stewart, living on alms and walking beside the Mississippi River, heading northwards from its mouth. The journey was much hindered by sickness but the account of the whole adventure can be read on the Abhayagiri website: [http://www.abhayagiri.org/books/mississippi-pilgrimage].

Tan Karunadhammo has learned to recite the Pātimokkha himself and he completed his ninth Rains in 2006. He has spent time at monasteries in England, New Zealand, Australia and at Bhavana Society in West Virginia; he is now resident at Abhayagiri once again.

Ajahn Sudanto has similarly come and gone, to Thailand and Birken Monastery in British Columbia [www.birken.ca], but he is also resident at Abhayagiri these days. He and Tan Karunadhammo plan to take up an invitation to spend the Rains of 2007 near Portland OR, at the request of Portland Friends of the Dhamma [www.pdxdhamma.org].

Over these foundational years of the Monastery these two monks, along with Tan Jotipālo, have been stalwart and generous members of the Abhayagiri community. They have helped greatly to support the practice and teaching of Dhamma here, both through their own spiritual commitment, as well as through looking after guests and the physical development of the site.

The close friendship with the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas has continued to be a blessing for both communities. We always have representatives at each other’s ordinations and our monthly gatherings in the Bay Area now take place at the Berkeley Buddhist Monastery, where Rev. Heng Sure, one of Master Hua’s most senior disciples is the abbot [www.drba.org].

It has now been several years since I last went to Buddha Dharma Meditation Center in Hinsdale, IL. Times have been hard for them and attendances somewhat low. They have tried to cut out all solely cultural activities but this has proved unpopular with some.

It has also been some years since I last saw Michigan but other senior Sangha members, such as Ajahns Sundarā, Sucitto and Thānasantī, have been making regular visits.

Richard Smith still hosts the monastic visits to Michigan and continues vigorously to support the community with its book publication projects. After The Pilgrim Kāmanīta was printed in 1999, he produced a book of talks by the nuns, Freeing the Heart in 2002. He is currently working on a book of meditation teachings by Ajahn Sucitto and also an anthology of the Buddha’s teachings on Nibbāna, by Ajahn Pasanno and myself, called The Island.

Tan Kalyano and his brother Tan Thanuttaro are both still happily living as monks. They have stayed at various monasteries in different countries around the planet, providing their dear mother, Bee Price, with ample opportunities for world travel as she goes to visit their multifarious homes. They were last spotted in Thailand, where Bee traveled to visit them, in January of 2006.

Tan Nipako returned to lay life after a few years as a monk.

My mother, who made brief appearances at the start of this journal and again at Amaravati, passed away peacefully in 2003, in her own bed, in Sherborne, Dorset. She was 82 years old.

Our neighbors at Casa Serena, Peter La Rivière and Mary Curran, both also passed away in recent years: Peter of lung cancer in the spring of 2000 and Mary of abdominal cancer in 2002. Just before her death Mary, with extraordinary yet characteristic generosity, donated her house to the Monastery thus giving us another 30 acres and a beautiful four-bedroomed amenity for women residents and guests.

Debbie Stamp continues to live and work with unstinting selflessness at the Monastery; she has been on the Board of Directors of Sanghapala since the late ’80s. She dwells in a cabin that was built for her in 1999, and she has been a much loved and helpful resident throughout this time.

Various members of the nuns’ community, particularly Ajahns Jitindriyā, Sundarā and Thānasantī have come and gone, spending a few months to a few years at Abhayagiri. It is planned that one day an autonomous nuns’ monastery will be founded somewhere in the area.

The Spirit Rock teachers are still a strong and cohesive group: the only ones to leave the area have moved on to warmer and slightly less expensive locations (Robert Hall has gone to Baja, Mexico, while Anna Douglas has moved to Tucson, AZ) although Anna still regularly teaches at SRMC and Robert from time to time. New members have joined the circle, namely Sharda Rogell, Sally Clough, Phillip Moffat, Mark Coleman, Diana Winston and Donald Rothberg; other generations are also on their way through the teacher training process with Jack.

The Center also becomes evermore multifaceted as the years progress; the range of workshops, retreats, events and classes now includes: Dharma for singles; painting retreats; teen vision quests and solstice rituals – the term Vipassanā is becoming proportionally more inclusive in its anglicized range of meanings.

Ajahn Jumnien comes every year to teach there.

San Francisco Zen Center continues to be a stable and strong presence in the area. Their model of shared leadership – a collaboration of co-abbots for the three main centers but no one fixed to a single place – has served them very well. The current co-abbots are Ryushin Paul Haller and Myogen Steve Stücky; Zenkei Blanche Hartman stepped down in 2003 and Linda Ruth Cutts in February of 2007.

Our connections with Portland have developed strongly in recent years with Sakula (Mary Reinard), who first met us when she drove Anita Wenninck to Abhayagiri, having set up a small teaching and practice center there – Friends of the Dhamma [www.pdxdhamma.org]. This center, and the group associated with it, plan to set up the temporary retreat situation for the two monks from Abhayagiri, mentioned above. One of the principal aims of this project, along with providing a useful retreat time for some worthy monastics, is to help seed interest in founding a branch Monastery in the area.

Our visits to Seattle are still sporadic; however, there is a small but dedicated group of friends and students who regularly meet and practice together in the area.

Several more ordinations have taken place at Abhayagiri over this time: Vens. Thitapuñño, Jotipālo, Phāsuko, Dhammadaso, Obhāso and Ñāniko have all been given the higher ordination here by Ajahn Pasanno. He also ordained Tan Hasapañño in New Zealand when his teacher, Ajahn Viradhammo, was unable to be present. Also added to the fold has been Craig Randolph, who wound up his life with the ballet company and is now Ahimsako Bhikkhu.

Although of this group Thitapuñño, Phāsuko, Dhammadaso and Obhāso have all now left the robes, the community has meanwhile grown with the addition of Sāmaneras Thitābho and Kassapo (who both started out at Abhayagiri) and Sampajāno Bhikkhu who began his monastic life in the Tibetan tradition and later became an anagarika in England. He is the most recent bhikkhu to be ordained here.

None of our original fleet of trailers remains on-site and, apart from three kutīs-on-wheels and a cloth yurt, all the other accommodations – comprising 17 kutīs and Casa Serena, the women’s guest-house – are warm, dry, legal dwellings with solid foundations. This is a big change from the tents and trailers we all inhabited in the early years.

In 1999 a group of Thai students of Ajahn Toon Khippapañño purchased a house and 240 acres of land on the eastern border of Abhayagiri, to be used as a seasonal retreat facility – it is known as KPY. Most years since then Ajahn Toon has come to visit and run retreats there for 60-100 people. We gave them most of our old trailers, which are still serving them well even though they too have built many kutīs in their own forest.

The construction of a sizeable new building near to the main house, consisting of disabled-access accommodation, bathroom and office space was completed in April of 2006. This new amenity has helped enormously in allowing the various tasks of the community to be carried out more efficiently and peacefully, since everyone is no longer crammed into a couple of small spaces in order to do their work, as was the case from 1996-2005.

Sakula of Portland, along with Jim Cameron of Florida, Jaya Karlson of Massachusetts and eight others, most of whom are not mentioned in these pages, have been part of a lay ministry training program known as CALM (Community of Abhayagiri Lay Ministers) since it was launched in 2001.

Some of the members of the Upasika community felt they would like more in-depth and specific training, to help them fulfill the various roles they had in leading local groups or teaching in some capacity. Thus this training was hatched.

The group of 11 trainees graduated in April of 2004. They come from California, Wisconsin, Oregon, Florida, North Carolina, Massachusetts and Alberta, Canada.

This is the first such group associated with any of the Ajahn Chah monasteries around the world; it is a very experimental venture.

The hope is that they will not only be better equipped to teach and run groups but that they will also be able to carry out functions that monastics cannot do, such as perform weddings, as well as to be chaplains for schools, hospitals or the military – some have already begun to serve in these roles.

In January of 2006 Ajahn Pasanno, Ajahn Sudanto and I took the whole group, plus a few significant others, to Thailand to visit various monasteries and highly accomplished teachers, and to attend the annual gathering at Wat Nong Pah Pong that occurs around the anniversary of Ajahn Chah’s passing away.

In 2002 Dennis Crean, one of the CALM trainees, purchased a house on 20 acres of land across the valley from Abhayagiri. At New Year of 2003, Huck Rorick purchased 220 acres adjacent to Dennis, also adjoining our property, along Russian River, in the hope of it being developed as a place for members of the lay community who want to be near the Monastery.

In 1998 James Baraz launched an initiative through Spirit Rock, called Community Dharma Leaders. It was a two-and-a-half year program and involved about 80 participants, mostly those leading Vipassanā meditation groups around America and Canada. I came along and helped with some of the training sessions and became so impressed with the usefulness of such a training that we launched the CALM program and about half our trainees joined up as part of the second batch of James’s students – CDL2.

After we launched the CALM program we found that Ven. Piyananda, abbot of Dharmavijaya Temple in Los Angeles, had also established a lay ministry training some years ago, as had Shasta Abbey.

Bhante Dhammavāro passed away aged 111, in 2000, close to his Monastery in Stockton, California. His disciples in England had gathered that day to have a celebration of his life and teachings – all those closest to him, who were not in America, were together when they got the news.

Chris Bradley became an anagarika for a year, served impeccably and has now returned to nursing in the native people’s villages of Great Trout Lake in northern Ontario.

We are still friendly with the Monks of Mount Tabor but they have had some difficult years. Father Damian is now living and teaching in Utah.

Father John Watson retired from the position of Chaplain at Sutton Valence School; he and his wife now live in the West Country.

The Massachusetts Monastery never happened. The group there wisely and cautiously opted to put themselves in the role of supporting “whatever the monastic Sangha feels is appropriate.” Thus they simply became Buddha-parisā, an organization existing in order to help our community teach and travel on the East Coast, particularly in the Massachusetts area. They coordinate visits, arrange teachings and host monastics passing through.

If it came about that the monastic community let them know that there were now sufficient appropriate people, and the interest to be available, to start an East Coast Monastery, they might well make an invitation but there is no expectation or urgent intention for them to do so.

IMS and BCBS are still going strong. The Forest Refuge opened for its first 30 long-term retreatants in early 2003 [www.dharma.org;  www.bcbsdharma.org/]

Spirit Rock has still to build its area for monastic residents; although, as of early 2007, the plans for the next major expansion there are budgeted at ~ $17 million, the hermitage section is not included in this.

Bodhi Tree Dhamma Center [www.floridanastuff.com/BTDC/btdchome.htm] continues to be a beacon of Dhamma faith and practice in Florida. Many Buddhist temples have appeared in urban areas in that part of the country in recent times, however, the interest in meditation is served by very few. Jim Cameron still staunchly keeps the Center going; his leg injuries are still somewhat troublesome but he has more help with caring for the place these days. Blossom the pig passed on.

Georgette and Maxwell are still happily ensconced in their rural retreat in Sussex, New Jersey.

Gina Sharpe and John Fowle bit the bullet and sold their lovely home, to move to a smaller house but on 23 acres of Westchester woodland. When last seen, John was in his element trudging the leafy paths in his wellies, pondering the many wonders that the land might conjure forth.

In the summer of 1998, having been ably guided and represented by Geraldine Rose, Abhayagiri Monastery was granted a Change of Use Permit by Mendocino County, allowing us to function and develop ourselves as a forest Monastery. The construction of the new buildings in April 2006 signaled the completion of Phase I of the four-phase plan we agreed on with the County. Phase II allows us to house up to 24 residents on the land.

Geraldine also nursed the planning applications of Rangjung Yeshe Gomde [www.gomdeusa.org]., SF Zen Center’s Paul and Melody Haller, the Vipassanā community of Goenka-ji [www.manda.dhamma.org] and The City of Ten Thousand Buddhas through their various stages of development – three-quarters of these were successful.

In February of 2004 the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas received final planning approval to construct their International Institute for Philosophy and Ethics – an 800-person facility, comprising 332,000 sq. ft. of buildings – to be their main monastic training center and the new home of Dharma Realm Buddhist University. They are already the largest Buddhist institution in the USA – with a monastic community of about 90 and a lay community of about 150 persons – this new development is indicative of their continued flourishing, however, as of 2005, the project has been put on “indefinite hold.”

Their senior and junior girls and boys schools are well-attended and so highly regarded that the head of the Ukiah school district sent his own children there rather than to the institutions he administers.

There are many Buddhist groups, monasteries and centers in Mendocino County now (22 at the last count) despite its small human population (84,000). An annual multi-lineage Buddhist picnic Dharma Under the Trees is often held, usually on Memorial Day, at Hendy Woods, Philo. The good Geraldine is the Dharma host.

The interest in ritual and devotional practices continues to develop, often mingled with other traditional forms. Joseph Goldstein hosted a day called Devoted to Emptiness at Spirit Rock as a fund-raiser for the Forest Refuge – the main feature was the Hindu bhajans of Jai Uttal [www.JaiUttal.com].

Jack Kornfield continues to develop ritual in his role as teacher and mentor, for many events such as the graduation of his teacher trainees, with men’s groups and events based upon racial and ethnic diversity.

We have added a few more chants to our repertoire at Abhayagiri, e.g. the Brahma Vihāras, The Discourse on the Highest Blessings and The Splendors of the Buddha – we still lead pūjās morning and evening on our retreats in Pāli and English. The Monastery mails out as many chanting CDs as it does those of Dhamma talks, and the audio and text files of our chanting are constantly being downloaded from the website.

The Zen Center Hospice, that was in its early years when “The Golden State” was written, has continued to be a bright light for many people. They have their own facility, at 283 Page St, San Francisco, as well as continuing to be the main part of that at the Laguna Honda Hospital.

Frank Ostazetski has stepped down, after 20 years in the saddle, and the organization is now being led by Marion Gruzalski, a long-time friend of ours and a student of Ajahn Sumedho. The numbers training as volunteers and the numbers of the dying who are being helped continue to stay high. [www.zenhospice.org].

Frank was even on the Oprah Winfrey show one day, as was Tara Bennet Goleman, incidentally, after the publication of Emotional Alchemy [www.emotionalalchemy.com]

The range of service activities in the Buddhist community has now spread to include numerous programs for youth, conferences and retreats to promote racial and ethnic diversity, and many Buddhist meditators have now trained in Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction (the program devised by Jon Kabat-Zinn in Massachusetts [www.umassmed.edu/cfm/index.aspx] and teach this in hospitals, prisons, schools and businesses throughout the USA.

There is a large network of people providing Dharma teachings all over the country for America’s massive prison population [www.prisondharmanetwork.org]. There is a great demand for written teachings but also many people are now actively involved in regularly teaching meditation to inmates. A very large proportion of the free Dhamma books mailed out from Abhayagiri are for people incarcerated around the USA.

Spirit Rock has established a city center in the East Bay, particularly to make the teachings more available to a wider sphere of people than the white middle-class educated crowd that usually fills the halls at the Center in well-heeled Marin County. A small group is actively involved in developing this, including James Baraz, Larry Yang, Spring Washam, Diana Winston, Kevin Griffin and Donald Rothberg [www.eastbaymeditation.org].

It is still true, nevertheless, that most other vipassanā groups and retreats around the country, such as at IMS in Massachusetts or at Seattle Insight Meditation Society [www.seattleinsight.org ] are solidly white middle-class baby-boomer types. When Ajahn Punnadhammo and I, out of curiosity, did the stats on the ages of the group attending our IMS retreat in 2001 it was a perfectly symmetrical bell curve – it peaked exactly at those born in 1949, who were 18 in 1967 the Summer of Love…

The Buddhist compassionate relief organization Tzu Chi Foundation has become more and more active in the US – along with centers in the major metropolises they also opened a center in Ukiah in the spring of 2004 [www.us.tzuchi.org/us/en/].

The US is still as intensely materialistic as it was, perhaps more so than ever, however that same intense bondage to the sense world continues to generate its opposite. The level of stimulation available to the average teenager now means that they have often seen and done it all by the time they are fifteen. Consequently Abhayagiri receives, on average, a couple of enquiries per week (usually by e-mail) from high school or college students interested in ordination.

Our Use Permit only allowed 13 people to stay on site at any one time during Phase I of the development, so a lot of people have had to be turned away. Some have gone to England or Thailand for training instead, some have waited and some have faded. Now that we have entered Phase II of our Permit we will be able to accommodate a larger number of candidates.

On my first visit in 1990 it became clear that the kind of people who were attracted to Theravādan monastic practice were not looking for or expecting a quick fix. And they were not looking just for spiritual entertainment either – when, in 1991, I came with a list of suggested titles for talks like The Myth of the Hero, Buddhist Metaphysics, The Joker and Navigating the Straits of Paradox, the group looked at me plaintively and asked: “Couldn’t you just give talks on the Four Noble Truths and the Three Characteristics, Ajahn?” In 2007 it’s still the same: people want us to be conservative.

In the last few years Buddhism has acquired a very acceptable face in America: notable Hollywood actors have declared their interest and commitment to Buddhist practice; there have been front-cover features on it in Time magazine; books like Emotional Intelligence, by Daniel Goleman have become national bestsellers – it has become almost mainstream and (generally) has a reputation for being wise and respectable.

The Taung Palu Monastery in Boulder Creek has become a very quiet place, usually only one or two monastics there these days.

Metta Forest Monastery, near Escondido, California and its abbot Tan Geoff (Ajaan Thānissaro) have become very prominent in the Theravāda world, particularly through his copious essays, books of his own talks, Sutta and Vinaya commentaries, and translations – released through the web via Access to Insight [www.accesstoinsight.org] and through free distribution books, mostly published by Dhamma Dāna, Sati Center for Buddhist Studies [www.sati.org] or through his monastery [watmetta.org].

The Vipassanā community of Goenka-ji have launched their own Dhamma publication distribution outlet in the form of the Pariyatti Book Service [www.pariyatti.com].

Bhavana Society in West Virginia, and its abbot Bhante Gunaratana have also become very well-known and much-loved in recent years. His book Mindfulness in Plain English has been a bestseller and sits beside the Zen Mind, Beginners Mind of Suzuki Roshi as a modern classic.

He has ordained numbers of monks and nuns since the Monastery was opened in 1988 and he travels the world almost constantly, giving talks and leading retreats. He has since published Eight Mindful Steps to Happiness, in 2000, and his autobiography was published in 2003, entitled Journey to Mindfulness [www.bhavanasociety.org].

In the lineage associated with Ven. Ajahn Chah, two other places have been established on the continent:

Arrow River Forest Hermitage, Thunder Bay, Ontario, where Ajahn Punnadhammo is the abbot, and often sole monastic – it is mainly a retreat facility for solitary meditation.

Birken Forest Monastery, near Princeton, British Columbia, where Ajahn Sona is the abbot. At present there are four monks in residence and a couple of anagarikas – it as been open (in this location) only since 2002. However, Ajahn Sona has been living as a monk in Canada (after five years in Thailand) since 1994 when he and Ven. Piyadhammo established the first Western Theravāda forest monastic site in Canada, in what came to be known as the Shack Monastery.

After four years at the Birken River near Pemberton, Ajahn Sona set up a more formal monastic community called Birken II, near Princeton. It then moved again and its current incarnation, at Smith Lake, is known affectionately as Birken III.

There was a third place on the continent, a branch of Birken Monastery, that was being founded in the mountains of Vera Cruz province in Mexico. It had its official opening in November of 2004, with Tan Thitapuñño as the senior monk there, however he decided to leave the robes soon after and the Monastery has since closed.

Cloud Mountain has been through a few changes but is still a strong and vibrant place [www.cloudmountain.org]. David Branscombe and Laura are still faithfully guiding and managing its care and development, although North-West Dharma Association (originally the support group for Cloud Mountain) have become an independent organization[www.northwestdharma.org].

The City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, despite extensive and sterling efforts to connect with the Caucasian American population, in particular through translation of talks and scriptures, still finds itself heavily dominated by interest from the Asian community. The Berkeley Buddhist Monastery, headed by Rev. Heng Sure, has made something of a change in this pattern, drawing numerous students from the University and other Berkeley locals; and, at the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas itself, the opening of their vegetarian restaurant to the public (best vegetarian food in Mendocino County, take it from me!) has created a very popular avenue of connection – few of the diners, however, take the opportunity to look in the bookstore or the 10,000 Buddha Hall.

In the late ‘90s Brother David Steindl-Rast spent three years living at Esalen Institute, invited there to develop community integration and to boost their dimension of spiritual presence. He now lives alone at a small hermitage in upstate New York [www.gratefulness.org].

I have not been back to Esalen since late ’97 – it had become too commercially oriented (e.g. $2135 for 7 days, in a “standard single room” in 2004) and, by my last visit there, I felt my time was largely being wasted [www.esalen.org]. Nevertheless, it should be acknowledged that that last occasion enabled me to meet Jonathan Birks, a young South African on the staff there; he eventually joined our community in England and was ordained as a novice, Sāmanera Appamāno, in New Zealand. He became a bhikkhu at Aruna Ratanagiri Monastery, in Northumberland [www.ratanagiri.org.uk] , however he too has recently returned to lay life.

Huge numbers of people now “virtually visit” Abhayagiri and download audio Dhamma talks and chanting, texts and books from the web-site. Similarly many individuals and groups have made large amounts of Dhamma books, Sutta translations, talks and pictures available through their own free web-sites, links and chat groups.

The Abhayagiri Upasika community, a group of some of the most committed friends and supporters of the monastery, even have a virtual Uposatha Observance through the Upasika chat list on the nights of the lunar quarters.

Michael Lieberman graduated from the University of Texas, in Austin, and Chris Morray-Jones quit his professorship at UC Berkeley, teaching Religious Studies; they both then joined Berkeley University’s Boalt Hall School of Law. Michael graduated from there in 2006 – having also managed to acquire a Master’s in International Relations from Tufts University at the same time – and has now moved to Washinton DC. He works in a legal consultancy there (“… earning more money than I’ll ever see,” quoth his father, Dr. Marc) and is keen to enter the political arena.

I met Father Kevin Hunt once more at Gethsemane II, a Buddhist/Christian inter-monastic dialogue, held at Father Thomas Merton’s Monastery in Kentucky, in the spring of 2003. Ajahn Sundara, Rev. Heng Sure, Joseph Goldstein and Norman Fischer were also there, along with 70 or so other bright lights of the American monastic world. Brother David was invited but chose to stay in his hermitage.

Rachel Mend Ropp had a beautiful baby in 2001 – Simone Marie – and another one, a boy, in 2005. She and her family have been living on Native American reservations for some years where her husband, Andy, works as a physician.

Edwin Kelley resigned from his position as Director at IMS; Myoshin Kelley is now one of the main resident teachers at the Forest Refuge – Edwin is reckoning on taking it easy (workwise) for a few years.

In the first few years after Abhayagiri was founded we saw very few Thai people. As the name has become more well-known, and as Ajahn Pasanno has become more famous in Thailand, the numbers of Thai visitors has greatly increased.

One on the main things he became well-known for was counselling Jay Siripongs, a Thai man who as executed in San Quentin in February of 1999, over the last days and hours before his death. More than 100,000 copies have been printed in Thai of the book describing that encounter.

Incidentally, Helena Havelock, the limo driver mentioned in the above journal entry in for July 2nd, spoke to me about Jay’s case as we drove in the car that day; she was an active member of a group opposing the death penalty and wanted to know if I had heard of the case or met Jay, as he was a Buddhist. As it transpired we got a call asking if we could help only days before the execution was due.

One of the main sources of support since my early visits to the Bay Area has been Ajahn Maha-Prasert, of Wat Buddhanusorn in Fremont, in the south-east corner of the Bay [www.watbuddha.org/]. When we first met, back in ’90, he surprised me by his whole-hearted enthusiasm for our plan to found a forest monastery.

In Thailand there is often a lot of antipathy between town monks and forest monks – the latter gaining more praise, as being meditation monks, than the former.

He was delighted, and said, “Can I help you? I cannot start a meditation Monastery here, that’s not what the people have invited me for, but I can help you to do it!” I was delighted and a firm friendship was formed. I also found out then that he had studied with Ajahn Chah when he was a young monk in northeast Thailand.

In 1995 my surprise was compounded when I told him about the new land we’d been given in Redwood Valley, north of Ukiah. “I know that place, I have been there,” he said. Assuming he couldn’t really mean this obscure little valley and that he meant he had been to see the giant redwood trees elsewhere in the County, I pointed to the map and said, “It’s here in this little town.”

“Yes, I know that place,” he replied again. “That’s where my friend Doctor Peter lives, and…. Mary, that’s right, his wife is called Mary.”

Just the day before I had managed to track down the name of the neighbour to the immediate north of the land Master Hua had just given us: Dr Peter La Rivière. “You know Peter La Rivière? But there are no Thai people at all in that whole county! What were you doing up there? How on earth do you know them?”

It turned out that Mary and Peter were indeed the only people that he knew in Mendocino County, and they just happened to be our new next-door-neighbours. Ajahn Maha-Prasert seemed surprised that we were surprised.

He explained: “When my 90-year-old teacher came from Thailand he got sick on the plane, Doctor Peter was looking after the emergency room in the hospital in LA at that time. By the end of the night we had become good friends. I go up to their place every year…”

Nowadays many younger Thais (and some older) have failed to encounter or develop any interest in Buddhism either in Thailand or, if they have grown up in the West, here in the USA. Now, as they see so much interest in Buddhism here, they become intrigued and start to investigate their own heritage. They are also more urbanized (and therefore stressed) and are eager for some peace.

So a lot of young Thais now practice Buddhism for the first time because of hearing about places like Wat Metta, Abhayagiri, Birken and also Bhavana Society. They are not generally so keen on the city temples, which tend to focus on cultural elements rather that just on meditation and spirituality. Wendy Cadge, of Princeton University, has written on this kind of cross-pollination and the fact that one can’t truly say that there is one Buddhism in America for the white middle class and one for the Asian immigrants – Heartwood: The First Generation Of Theravada Buddhism In America [www.cjsonline.ca/pdf/heartwood.pdf].

Ajahn Maha-Prasert has ordained a young Caucasian American man, Tan Michael, at his temple in Fremont. Along with the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas monastics who come to our ordinations, Ajahn Maha-Prasert always either comes himself or sends representative monks. During 2006, while Ajahn Pasanno was away in Thailand on sabbatical, Ajahn Maha-Prasert graciously stepped in to act as preceptor for the bhikkhu ordination of Tan Sampajāno.

He has also become a teacher and mentor for the former Yeo‑Kwang Sunim, now better known as Ayya Tathāloka Bhikkhunī, an American nun originally ordained in the Korean tradition. He has taken her along with his group when returning to visit Thailand and has offered to help her stay there if she would like to. He sees her example could be a great encouragement for Thai people to accept the reintroduction of the bhikkhunī order.

She has now established, with the vigorous encouragement of Ajahn Maha‑Prasert, her own Monastery in Fremont, called Dhammadharini [www.dhammadharini.net].

In the late 1990s Thich Nhat Hanh shifted the emphasis of his teaching, from lay students and a group of trained lay teachers (Dharmacariyas) onto the monastic order. He began vigorously to encourage monastic training and, consequently, many young people have gone forth under his guidance since then – their monastic community now numbers more than 200, mostly ordained within the last seven years.

Maple Forest Monastery (for monks) was founded in Vermont ’97, as the first branch of Plum Village – their main center in France – and Green Mountain Dharma Center (for nuns), also in Vermont, opened in 1998; Deer Park Monastery, Escondido, California was founded shortly after. In February 2004 Thich Nhat Hanh gathered all 200+ of his monastics together at Deer Park for a three month retreat.

Chozen and Hogen Bays, finding the development of their community constantly frustrated by planning restrictions, finally moved away from the Columbia Gorge in 2002. The newly opened Great Vow Zen Monastery [www.greatvow.org] is just outside the town of Clatskanie, about 40 miles northwest of Portland. They continue to be keen on inter-lineage Buddhist exchanges; in the autumn of 2003 I co-led another retreat with Chozen and Hogen there, as a way of offering support to their new venture.

The constant drift toward commercialism in the Buddhist world also continues to create its opposite: that retreat at Great Vow was run solely on dāna (freewill donations) and even all the food and drink used was donated, prepared and offered by the retreatants. All Abhayagiri retreats are now done on dāna and groups in Santa Fe, Bellingham WA, and the monastic retreats at Spirit Rock and IMS are now all done on a dāna basis too.

Gil Fronsdal and his many students in the Palo Alto/Silicon Valley/Stanford University area, opened their own center in 2002 as a branch of Spirit Rock. Its classes are currently brimming and the new facility is already being pressed for space. Known now simply as the Insight Meditation Center, all their events are run solely on dāna moreover, Gil and his family have no other source of income [www.insightmeditationcenter.org].

Shasta Abbey and its branches are still going very strong, even after the death of their founder and teacher Jiyu Kennett Roshi in 1996. Their community has put considerable effort into connecting with the wider Buddhist world in recent years and they too are appreciative of the cross-fertilization and mutual support that has come from contacts with the Chinese Ch’an tradition, Tibetan monastic orders and with Theravāda [www.shastaabbey.org].

Their community has by far the largest number of Western monastics who have been ordained for 15 or more years – probably 20 of the 35 monks living there.

Since 1994 there has been an annual conference held in California, for ordained celibate Buddhist monastics living in the West. Abhayagiri first got involved in the autumn of 1998 when it was held at Shasta Abbey; previous gatherings had been at Land of Medicine Buddha and Vajrapani Institute. Subsequent ones have been at the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, Vajrapani and Land of Medicine Buddha again, and at Bhavana Society.

About 30-40 nuns and monks of all major lineages participate each year for this delightful and informal get-together; it has proved to be invaluable as an occasion for sharing the joys and sorrows of monastic life and learning valuable lessons across traditions about how to live most skillfully as a monastic in this current era.

San Francisco Zen Center never got an Eight Precept standard going at Tassajara. However, in 2000 a small hermitage called No Abode was set up close to Green Gulch, to be a celibate monastic residence in their lineage, largely on the initiative of one sincere and dedicated priest, Luminous Owl.

There were many struggles involved, particularly: how do you run a celibate monastic community as a subset of a lay priesthood, especially when 100% of the main teachers of the community are married or in relationships?

Few other SFZC students spent time with him there and the overall response to this initiative from his community was lukewarm at best.

Even if alone, however, Luminous Owl would regularly go out for alms in Mill Valley, having been inspired by his times in Thailand and Japan. Sadly, however, the hermitage has now closed and Luminous Owl has moved back into community at Green Gulch Zen Center.

The Sangha at Abhayagiri goes through Ukiah, and usually Redwood Valley, every week on alms-round, on the Observance days of lunar quarter. We always receive far more food than we can eat.

There are several places calling themselves Zen monasteries around the US nowadays – such as Zen Mountain Monastery in Mount Tremper, NY [zmm.mro.org], Tassajara Zen Mountain Center [http://www.sfzc.org/tassajara/default.asp], Great Vow in Oregon – they are modeled on the great Japanese training centers, however all these are headed by married lay priests, rather that the celibate teachers that would be found at such centers in Japan.

There often seems to be a gentle tide of confusion arising in the residents of such places: people practice very sincerely but can’t quite figure out exactly what a monk/priest is supposed to be: at Mount Tremper, for example, residents are expected to be celibate during the week but at weekends it’s optional; at Tassajara, residents are forbidden to form new relationships whilst on site but can go away for a few days and come back to the Monastery as a couple…

Shasta Abbey [www.shastaabbey.org] is almost the only place out of the Japanese tradition that is joyously free of this conundrum, although One Drop Zen Monastery, Whidbey Island, WA [onedropzen.org/community/usa/tahoma_sogenji], established in 1995 by students of Shodo Harada Roshi, a celibate Japanese monk of very high repute, is also worthy of mention in this regard.

In 1999 Spirit Rock hosted a conference for 220 Buddhist teachers of all lineages with HH the Dalai Lama. Amongst the organizing circle who pulled the event together were: Yvonne Rand, Norman Fischer, Jack Kornfield, Lama Surya Das, Ken McLeod, Tsultrim Allione, Bodhin Kjolhede (Roshi Philip Kapleau’s Dharma heir), and myself. Norman Fischer and I gave the non-keynote or off-keynote talks during the event.

Tricycle Magazine [www.tricycle.com], established in 1991, has continued to be an influential presence in the USA and was joined by Buddhadharma [www.thebuddhadharma.com], an offshoot from Shambhala Sun, in 2002.

More Asian people are sitting on our meditation retreats these days; out of the 80 or so gathered for one recent retreat at Angela Center, Santa Rosa, CA, there were representatives from eight different Far Eastern nations.

A lot has changed in New York City since my first visit there. Needless to say, the destruction of the Two Towers had a radical effect on the local consciousness, inclining a lot more people toward reflection and meditation. Many more senior teachers visit there these days; New York Insight has a brimming catalogue of events and a steadily growing family of committed members [www.nyimc.org].

Paul and Lili Breiter moved to Florida so that he would be in closer proximity to his agèd parents. He has now translated and published several books: Venerable Father, a memoir of his time with Ajahn Chah, Being Dharma (Shambhala Publications), Everything Arises, Everything Falls Away (also by Shambhala Publications), and Everything is Teaching Us, a collection initially published for free distribution in Australia – these latter three volumes are all anthologies of Ajahn Chah’s teachings.

Chuang Yen Monastery of upstate New York and Bodhi Monastery of Lafayette, New Jersey, have also been prominent in cross-tradition activity in recent years. The latter is a Ch’an monastery in the lineage of Master Yin Shun.

I first heard of it through Georgette Siegel; when she took me to visit there I was shocked to see, as I entered the front door, reprints of several Ajahn Chah and Ajahn Sumedho books sitting on a rack, for free distribution. When I picked one up I was even more startled to see it had been printed by Chuang Yen Monastery. They were exceptionally interested in and knowledgeable about Theravāda Buddhism.

In 2002 Bhikkhu Bodhi, an American Theravādan monk and scholar who had been resident in Sri Lanka for more than 30 years and editor of the Buddhist Publication Society, moved in there and, in 2003, Ajahn Sundarā spent the Rains Retreat there as well.

The journal of the Indian pilgrimage made by Ajahn Sucitto and Nick Scott, named in the account as Where are You Going? was finally published by Wisdom, in 2006, under the title Rude Awakenings. Regrettably they felt that the entire account would be too long to be commercially viable so they only printed the first half – there is no sign yet of them undertaking Part II…

In recent years several teachers of hatha yoga, all of whom have long-standing experience with Buddhist meditation, have begun to develop styles of yoga practice that include Buddhist principles. Among these are Jill Satterfield [www.vajrayoga.com], Mary Paffard [www.yogamendocino.org] and Sarah Powers [www.sarahpowers.com]; the former two have taught yoga on several of our ten-day meditation retreats and I have collaborated with them a number of combined yoga/ Buddhist meditation events.

In 1999 I was invited to co-lead a ten-day retreat at Spirit Rock with the Dzogchen master Tsokny Rinpoche; it was said to have probably been the first Theravāda/Vajrayāna collaborative event since Nalanda University was destroyed in the 12th Century CE. The talks I gave at that retreat were published in 2003 as a book, Small Boat, Great Mountain; apparently it has been a very popular item to download from [forestsanghapublications.org].

In 2000 the students of Tsoknyi Rinpoche and his elder brother Chokyi Nyima Rinpoche opened the retreat center, Rangjung Yeshe Gomde, near Leggett, on the Eel River about 60 miles north of Abhayagiri.

More than five miles of footpaths, bridges and steps have been gently carved into the hillsides of the Abhayagiri forest. The loop trail that circles the whole of the interior of the bowl of our valley is two-and-a-half miles long and has thirteen footbridges over the creeks that crease the precipitous hillsides.

The junior monks have continued to keep up the practice of traveling away from the familiar environs of Abhayagiri, after a few years of training: Tan Hasapañño has gone to Thailand and has settled there, although at the time of writing he is on a sojourn in Australia; Tan Ñāniko also spent a year in Thailand but is now back at Abhayagiri; Tan Ahimsako is spending his time away in England; he is due to return to Abhayagiri in June of 2007.

Several of the other characters mentioned in these narrative have also gone through major transitions: John Cianciosi and Aungchoye Thrupkaew are no longer together, however, Joseph Kappel and Katherine were married in the fall of 2004; Ajahns Vipassi, Akiñcano and Samvaro have all disrobed, while Kris, our trusty botanical guide in New York and the sister of Jill Satterfield, got married recently and already has two children to occupy her in another kind of nursery.

Since the latter half of 1998 both Ajahn Pasanno and I have made the training of the monastic community the number one priority at Abhayagiri. From the beginning (i.e. 1996) it was clear we did not need to try to be all things to all people – a problem that Spirit Rock continually wrestles with – but we saw that, in order to do what we really wanted to do here, and to offer that which so few other places were providing (i.e. thorough training in classic Theravādan monastic practice) we had to narrow the focus even more. We have learned to say No to a lot of things.

At least half of the day’s hours of the residents of Abhayagiri are spent alone in our kutīs. They are all out of sight of each other and mostly out of earshot too.

In 2004, seeing that the Monastery had by then been open for seven years and that all seemed reasonably well-settled, Ajahn Pasanno and I decided to take sabbaticals for a year each.

From June 2004 to June 2005 I traveled in India, visiting the Buddhist holy places; from February 2006 to February 2007 Ajahn Pasanno was on solitary retreat in Thailand. During the absence of one co-abbot, the other simply stayed in residence at Abhayagiri and looked after the needs of the community. These times away proved very beneficial for both of us, in many and various ways.

Finally: the very fact that you, dear reader, are perusing this book means that you too are part of this ongoing story. May its recounting help to lead you to Awakening and the heart’s true release from all dukkha.