## Beginnings

Perhaps it is impossible to say where anything really begins, nevertheless, it can be useful to map out a few landmarks here and there. Accordingly, here is a little of the background against and amongst which much of the thread of these travelogues unravels.

In the early 1980s Ajahn Sumedho began to make regular visits to northern California. He was the senior Western disciple of Ajahn Chah, one of the most highly respected Buddhist masters of the Thai forest tradition of Theravāda Buddhism, and he had been invited to come and teach in the US by Jack Kornfield, a former Peace Corps volunteer and psychologist, with whom he had spent some time in Thailand, in the late ’60s, when they were both monks under Ajahn Chah’s tutelage.

Jack had left the monk’s robes after returning to the States in the early ’70s and, with his friends Sharon Salzberg, Joseph Goldstein and Jacqueline Schwarz (now Mandell), had embarked upon establishing the Buddhist retreat center in Massachusetts called Insight Meditation Society (IMS). This had met with great success but had also revealed some differences in styles of teaching and practice amongst the founders. These differences, along with the massive interest in Buddhist meditation that was brewing in northern California, led Jack back to his city of origin, San Francisco, to found a parallel center to IMS on the West Coast. When it eventually came into being the new place became known as Spirit Rock Meditation Center.

These annual invitations to California were doubly attractive to Ajahn Sumedho in that, not only being an American and an alumnus of Berkeley University and thus being given a chance to visit his old stomping grounds, they also gave him the opportunity to visit his elderly parents and sister in San Diego. It therefore duly became part of his annual schedule to step out of the many duties he had in the foundation of his new monasteries in England (Cittaviveka in West Sussex and Amaravati in Hertfordshire) and to head to the West Coast for a few weeks to teach and to see family.

Over the next ten years he developed a devoted following of students in the San Francisco Bay Area. In 1988 they formed the Sanghapala Foundation, with the mission of creating a branch Monastery of Ajahn Chah’s lineage somewhere in northern California. Dr. Marc Lieberman, Nancy Garfield, Debbie Stamp and Daniel Barnes, whom the reader will encounter in the coming pages, were key figures in the early days of Sanghapala, hosting and organizing many of the events.

In 1990 the present author, along with Ajahn Sundarā and Sister Jotakā (two of the senior nuns of our community at that time), accompanied Ajahn Sumedho on one of these teaching visits and, when the other three left to return to England, I remained behind to establish a temporary vihāra (monastic residence) as an experiment for the subsequent six weeks. There was plenty of interest in the idea of founding a Monastery amongst the small inner circle of lay friends but it was unknown if there would be any wider enthusiasm for the project. Thus the experiment.

Things went well – along with the regular teachings that were given in San Francisco, I traveled widely to respond to other invitations and met numerous people; many were sympathetic with the idea of a forest Monastery and some energetically committed to making it happen. An account of that year’s visit was subsequently published as The Golden State in the Forest Sangha Newsletter (our Monastery journal) and later reprinted in Silent Rain – an anthology of talks, poems and travelogues, published in 1995 – as well as in this collection you are reading now.

Ajahn Sumedho’s parents had both passed away in 1989 so, as he also had ever-increasing commitments with the monasteries in England, thereafter I became the central teacher for the California students. At one point, at the start of 1992, it looked as though all the conditions were ripe for the new Monastery to begin; however, that apparent ripeness also coincided with the passing away of Ajahn Chah and with the disrobing and departure of a number of senior monks and nuns in the community – it was plainly not the time to be starting any new ventures.

The pattern of that first year thus repeated itself for quite some time: I came for a few months each year, Sanghapala set up another temporary vihāra, I would travel and teach and then head back to England again. At first I had been somewhat disappointed, to have the momentum of establishing the new foundation seemingly so dissipated, but it quickly became apparent that these things are largely a matter of perspective: Who’s to say that there will be a Monastery at all? Why should it be you who starts it?

This hiatus thus did a lot to help reveal shallow personal and ambitious tendencies within me and helped to keep bringing the mind back to what the whole endeavor was for in the first place – i.e. simply making Theravāda teachings, based on monastic practice, available to those who were interested. So, to my surprise, I eventually became grateful for the extra time it brought. Furthermore the annual visits cultivated a growing sense of community in those who kept showing up for our events and who plainly evinced a heartfelt connection to the Theravāda monastic tradition. We were becoming a Dhamma family. And this did not just involve the Bay Area community – my regular travels to Florida, Michigan and Chicago, to Portland, Seattle and Massachusetts all contributed to the formation of a web of like-minded folks across the nation, from sea to shining sea.

The efforts to establish the California Monastery thus moved slowly until the summer of 1995. At that time, as Ven. Master Hsüan Hua (abbot of the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, in Ukiah, California) approached his death he offered Ajahn Sumedho 120 acres of forest in Redwood Valley, some 17 miles north of the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, in order to help him start the Monastery that he knew we had been contemplating for some time.

I was in England, at Amaravati, on the day that he made this great gesture of friendship and generosity. On the previous day, May 31st, we had had a Sangha meeting there and had finally agreed that there were now enough senior monastics around, and enough stability in the community, to allow us to begin looking for land in California. On the morning of June the 1st we got the call to let us know about the offer. It all fitted very well.

On several occasions, Master Hua had made a point of stating that it had been the dream of his life “to bring the Northern and Southern traditions of Buddhism back together again.” His offering was one of openhearted ecumenical friendship, and it enabled the two communities to be physically close and to relate in an atmosphere of mutual respect and harmony.

In choosing a name for the Monastery it seemed appropriate to reflect on the kindness of this offering and the spirit in which it was intended. It also seemed important to use a name in the Pāli language, to confirm the sense of allegiance to the Theravāda tradition. The name that was finally settled upon, “Abhayagiri,” means “Fearless Mountain.” The original Abhayagiri Monastery was in ancient Sri Lanka, at Anuradhapura. That Monastery was most notable for welcoming practitioners and teachers from many different Buddhist traditions. They lived there amicably alongside one another, distinct in their particular practices but not separate as communities. During the 4th Century CE Abhayagiri housed some 5,000 monks, according to the Chinese pilgrim Fa Hien, who visited there at that time.

Now that it has been developed for a few years, Abhayagiri Monastery in California is a center of teaching and practice for people in monastic or lay life. Its heart is a community of monks (bhikkhus), novices (sāmaneras), and postulants (anagarikas) pursuing a life of meditative reflection. Frequently monastics from other branches of this global community come and stay for periods of time. Those wishing to join the Sangha initially make a commitment as an anagarika for one year, during which time they can train in the monastic life and consider a longer commitment. After another year as a sāmanera, those who decide to continue with the training may be accepted into the Sangha of fully ordained monks. Shorter, temporary ordinations as an anagarika are also possible.

The Sangha lives according to the Vinaya, a code of monastic discipline established by the Buddha. In accordance with this discipline, the monastics are alms-mendicants, living lives of celibacy and frugality. Above all, this training is a means of living reflectively and a guide to keeping one’s needs to a minimum: a set of robes, an alms bowl, one meal a day, medicine when ill, and a sheltered place for meditation and rest.

The Vinaya creates a firm bond between the Sangha and the general public. One reason for this is that without the daily offering of alms food, and the long-term support of ordinary people, the Sangha cannot survive. Obviously, the necessary support will only be forthcoming if the Sangha provides an example that is worthy of support. This relationship creates a framework within which generosity, compassion and mutual encouragement can grow.

Dependence upon others encourages monastics to live in faith and to be content with a humble standard of living. For those who support the Sangha, this opportunity to give provides occasions for generosity and a joyful and direct participation in the spiritual life. In return the Sangha offers people spiritual guidance by verbal teachings and by its living presence. Many of these themes are explored in the talk Rugged Interdependency, included in the latter part of this book.

Although Abhayagiri Monastery is not a retreat or meditation center, people are welcome to visit, or to arrange a stay as a guest and to share the lifestyle of the monastic community for a time. The community’s meditation and work provides visitors with living examples of the Buddhist path. Guests can stay up to a week – longer stays are possible with the agreement of the community. Such visits can give lay practitioners the opportunity to deepen their understanding of Buddhism and of themselves in an environment that encourages peaceful reflection.

Abhayagiri Monastery was the first Monastery in the United States to be established by followers of Ajahn Chah. After the first six months Ajahn Pasanno came from Thailand and joined me to guide the Monastery as co-abbot. We had begun (on June the 1st 1996) with myself, one other monk (Ajahn Visuddhi) and a one-day-old anagarika (Tom DeMaria). Those earliest days were an understandable rush of new experiences – both good and bad, predictably – but all was held in a firm embrace of Dhamma practice.

During the many years I had lived as a monk in England, I had heard Ajahn Sumedho recount repeatedly the way in which he had worked with his mind when he had first arrived from Thailand, in 1977: “Every time that I thought, ‘I have to bring the Dhamma to the West,’ or ‘All these people are looking to me as their teacher and I mustn’t let them down,’ or ‘It’s up to me to preserve the pure bhikkhu life in the West and to make sure it never gets corrupted,’ then I would suffer tremendously. Instantaneously! But if I just thought, ‘People have invited me here to live and practice the Dhamma, moment by moment,’ then I would immediately feel ease and joy – ‘How wonderful! That’s what I love to do and I can do that anywhere.’ It was not a problem.”

So I took my lead from that and determined to do the same: simply to practice the Dhamma and if the Monastery and the Teaching flourished, so be it. And if it all collapsed and fizzled, so be it – the practice would be the same. Over the years this advice has served very well.

The three-month travelogue, entitled Golden Highways Revisited, comes from a period a couple of years after the foundation of the Monastery. It was at the end of the time when I accepted all the invitations from around the country that could practicably be squeezed into the calendar. As it happened, the travels of that spring and early summer encompassed virtually every group, center and Monastery that we had been connected with in the USA., as well as a side trip to an ordination in England, plus a visit to my alma mater there – thankfully the calendar has never been quite so packed before or since. It also occurred just a few weeks after Jack Kornfield had put forth the suggestion – to the teachers and Board of IMS, friends and supporters of ours in Massachusetts and to the monastic community at Abhayagiri – that a Monastery similar to Abhayagiri should be founded at or close to IMS.

One might well wonder why, with a schedule already so brim-full, one would have wished to load it further with the burden of keeping a journal along the way. Good question… However, it was just this happenstance touching of all the familiar nodes of our Dhamma family web that was the reason.

In 1997 Dr. Martin Verhoeven (formerly a monk at the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas and now a teacher at the Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley) had introduced me to Professor Richard Hughes Seager, an academic historian at Hamilton College, New York, and author of Buddhism in America (Columbia University Press). The professor had read The Golden State and was enthusiastic in his praise for its unique perspective – not only in coming from a monastic but also from a non-American’s point of view. He fervently encouraged the penning of more such reviews of the American Buddhist landscape, and the result, dear reader, is now part of what you hold in your hands, or at least are looking at on a screen.

Like The Golden State, this extended travelogue is not intended as some kind of opinionated set of judgements on Buddhism in America, more it is intended to be a slice through the fragrant American pie of Buddhist life – to let us take a look, and smell and taste for ourselves what has been cooked up here in recent years.

Needless to say, if any persons or institutions mentioned in this book seem to have been represented in an unfavorable light, the author begs for your generosity in forgiveness; what is written here is solely in the light of personal impressions and perspectives. It has been my intent simply to open the pie up without adding too much of my own embellishment but sometimes that’s a tricky maneuver to accomplish.

Enjoy!