## 1998 - Golden Highways Revisited

A journey through American and English Buddhist landscapes

### Part I San Francisco – Tampa Bay – Sussex NJ – Massachusetts – New York

March 26th

BRIGHT AND HUMID – they say the good weather came with us and that the winter had been strangely damp and cold – Florida is in it’s customary apparel of T-shirts and shorts, cumulus clouds and emerald lawns.

After leaving my mother, sister and brother-in-law (who had come from England to visit my new home in California for the first time) to the tender mercies of Hwy 280 and air-traffic control at midday, a quiet afternoon passed at Marc Lieberman’s house, 10, Arbor Street: reading and letter-writing, suffering and not suffering. Suzanne appeared after 4:00 and Marc swung in breathless at 6:35. With a quick about-face we loaded up his car and took off for the airport ourselves.

Our lives are both so heavily scheduled these days that our friendship bears its fruits in brief telephone conversations and these sporadic passing contacts. We catch up: he’s quitting his eye-practice and setting up alone; “The Jew in the Lotus” film was a roaring, front-page success in Boston; Michael, his son, got in to Michigan State university; Suzanne dropped the manufacturing project she had and will help Marc set up instead; the monastery goes well; the Sangha is healthy; the “change of use” application is proceeding…. samsāra as usual, albeit with beneficent faces at present.

Brief, quiet flights and we touch down at dawn in Tampa Bay. Steve Ganci is there to meet – red hot-rod of his partner’s son to drive as the kid is in trouble with the law and mother has had to adopt the vehicle. As we pull out from the terminal’s concrete labyrinths the luminescent sapphire of a tropical dawn embraces us; a fingernail moon, low in the sky with Venus more than close enough to start breathless rumours, hangs framed by dark palms along the highway. Water on all sides – the sky and all that meets the eye impossible blue – we are the breath of a vast jewel, cyan aquamarine, wavelet oscillations in azure.

We talk and replenish our friendship as the other colours soak into the day: the state of Theravāda/Vipassanā in the USA, the attitudes towards monasticism, the currents of change in Jack Kornfield and the growing interest in Pāli scriptures – after owning the vehicle for 25 years you finally take a look at the engine and study the manual, even give a nod to the provenance of the beast.

Up until now individualistic, authority-snubbing and anti-hierarchical American perspectives have (understandably) permeated the Buddhist world here. This was no surprise to us since Ajahn Sumedho had often described how, when he made his first visit back to the US in ’76, he encountered zero interest in having him around to teach: “Yes, nice to see you, thank you very much, now please just move on – we’re going to do it all different here.” We are, after all, a pretty conservative lot. England and it’s old-world institutional forms turned out to be a much more natural seed-bed for this classical, orthodox style of practice, so it’s no wonder that, since we arrived there in ’77, this monastic community was welcomed with (modestly) open arms – after all the English do not hug.

So, during these last few years in America, it has been an unexpected but heart-warming experience to see a recognition of the worth of scriptural texts, monastic training and commitment to renunciation rising up. It’s not that all of a sudden monastic practice is the latest thing but perhaps it just needed 20 years of trying “new, improved – faster, bigger, better,” to reveal the limitations of that ethic. Certainly the New World spirit can be massively refreshing and contributory to spiritual growth but it’s also good to be seeing that some of the values of the Old Country of the Dhamma are more loved and respected than before.

A quiet morning at Bodhi Tree Dhamma Center, tucked as it is in amongst the steadily spreading sprawl round Tampa Bay. It is in Pinellas County, on Florida’s central gulf coast close to St Petersburg and Clearwater (home of the Scientologists and the Madonna of the mirror-glass bank). The acre of grounds that forms the little Center features a meditation hall and bookstore, areas for outdoor walking meditation and a vigorous Bodhi tree, Ficus religiosa.

The Center opened in 1985 as a meeting place for the Florida West Coast Buddhist Society, a non-denominational Buddhist study group. It was founded in its present form with the help of the well-know monks and meditation teachers Ven. U Silananda (from Burma) and Bhante Gunaratana (from Sri Lanka). Although not formally affiliated with other institutions, Bodhi Tree maintains contact with many other meditation centers. In 1993, a fund was established for the eventual purchase of land for a rural retreat center in west-central Florida.

The main focus of the place is “the alleviation of suffering through the spread of the Dhamma, the teachings of the Buddha as preserved in the Pāli Canon and the Theravāda traditions of southern Asia.” Intensive retreats and classes are offered periodically, and regular meetings are held that include periods of vipassanā meditation and a talk on some aspect of Buddhism. Although primarily Theravāda in orientation, Bodhi Tree also hosts visits by teachers from other Buddhist traditions.

Jim Cameron is the main force behind the place these days. The Center actually sits in the grounds surrounding his modest home and he seems to be the organiser, secretary, yoga-teacher and janitor for most of their activities.

He had first taken an interest in Buddhism in 1971,when he was a young conscript stationed in Fort Hood, Texas. When he arrived in PhuBai, Viet-Nam, in July of ’71, he did duty riding shotgun on convoys between Dānang and QuangTri. They would pass through villages with monasteries and temples, and he was always filled with wonder by the Buddha images that he saw there.

One day he was called down to Dānang for some records issue. While waiting on the return Chinook helicopter at Freedom Hill there, he met a young bhikkhu with a string of mala beads who was also waiting for the ride. Jim had been simply awed and intrigued by him and they flew up the firebase together. He was very curious about the monk: he was so tranquil that it made him wonder, “What is this?” That was the moment the Dhamma had really entered his heart.

He later confessed that he had had a rather naive wish to “bring” a monk home with him, thinking that he could set the monk up with a little place and be the monk’s supporter. In a way, with the visits to Bodhi Tree of the likes of Bhante Gunaratana, Ven. U Sīlananda and myself, his dream of hosting and supporting monastics has come true – at least in sporadic bursts.

Today, nearly 30 years later, he is fresh back from the Old Sod and we spend the morning re-connecting and exchanging tales – it is sweet to be with these folks again.

Their year has been quiet, only one or two retreats with Matthew Flickstein; I wonder how/if they were deflated by my non-acceptance of “Spiritual Directorship”? There was an edge to Jim’s comments that spoke of a sadness that they had not been doing much more than the regular sittings. He also had been having major health problems – his injured leg (damaged in the war in Viet-Nam) was finally giving out on him – but we shall see… there was also talk of some students of Bhante Gunaratana buying land between Tampa and Orlando to start a residential center and that bodes well for the community here.

Warm afternoon: thick scent of orange-blossom in the air.

March 27th

First morning sitting, before the retreat begins – a crowd of birdsong fills the air, the chickens begin to scratch, a road roars in the distance. No words.

Swallow-tails and dragonflies, thin as pine-needles, dart and hover among the bushes. Clouds begin to clear. Bamboo creaks – leaves and their shadow-partners flimmering in the brassy heat of afternoon. Blossom holds the horizontal with barely a stir all day – Jim gives her an affectionate scratch in passing, she grunts her love for him in short snorts and squeals. If you’re going to be reborn as a pot-bellied pig, aim for the Bodhi Tree address.

March 28th

A small clutch of twelve souls forms the core of the retreat – other folks come and go each day. Bringing into consciousness the heart of kindness and the cycles of rebirth – so easy to explain, done so many times before, but the deep-tissue mysteries of clinging and identity ever amaze with their tenacity, guile, elasticity and sweetness. The knife keeps hitting those horny tendons and gets deflected again and again. What to do? Sharpen, persist, be patient – be ready to fail, intend to succeed…

Through the day we shuttle back and forth between formality and informality, activity and rest, the retreat and the cartographical machinations of Mason and Dixon. From the ringing of crickets in the gathering dark to the shores of Susquehanna; discoursing on the body in the mind and the heart of loving-kindness whilst shuffling along 39o 43’ 17.4” in the company of Lord and Lady Lepton and an automated yet unnamed female duck of Parisian origin. Ruth is stranger than Richard…

March 29th

All stay through until the retreat’s end (there were only four at the finish – including yours truly – last year) and leave for their homes glowing gently.

Jim and I drive down to the Barrier Islands and go for a long stroll on the beach – catching the liquid iron sunset at the apogee of our trip. Moves are afoot in Bodhi Tree to go to a more lay-based model although who knows how things will evolve. On our return to the vehicle we see a vast “bungy-vessel,” strung between two lit-up towers; a capsule, obviously containing some screamers, plunged earthwards twixt two giant rubber bands. The array sprang them up and down a good few times before the oscillation drew to a close, bearing them safely to the ground. The next big thrill in Tampa Bay.

On returning, the friends of Jim who had dropped in before – Ken the car dealer and his young, bikini-topped bride – were still at his home and had now been joined by John, a buddy and neighbour working at the VA hospital. He had developed a ritual of bringing Jim (and other friends on the block) a weekly pie. Innocent and sweet folks, whose conversation revolved around holidays, menus and vehicles. Just at the point where I began to feel a bit of a lemon they all upped and departed – Jim went to take the pie to Judy next door and all we are left with is the sweet warm night and the soft clattering of bodhi leaves.

March 30th

Departures and arrivals: a morning with Jim down to the Seahorse for breakfast (his ex-wife’s favourite haunt) and thence on to the Myakka nature reserve. Cool sea breezes pour steadily through the restaurant window, the day is bright again and the morning pavements are thick with the middle aged – snowbirds savouring the last of the mellow season before Florida turns up the heat.

Bright and cloud-strewn, we make our way on broad highways through the endless succession of passages, causeways, bridges and island-hops that form the lacework of this area. Glittering waters stretch smooth in all directions (only a few feet deep for the most part) condos rise, fast food and hotels fill the eye at every close-up. The horizon is ever a hazy strip of dark green – here “a hill” is the inches the highway rises above the swamp. White motor launches, bearing their proud charges, thrust themselves through the layers of benevolent sea. We head south.

Strangely reminiscent of the Esan, North-east Thailand, in the monsoon – water-filled fields, lush trees, deep ditches abound on all sides. The clouds gather and the humidity gets thicker but the glare is bright as ever.

Myakka has just opened again following major winter floods – the water laps the road way all through the park. Herons and snowy egrets plus other birds galore are thick on the ground as they step their gently merciless way through the waters. Palmetta covers the ground that’s visible, along with marsh grass and speckles of wild iris. The river has spread wider than Jim has ever seen, submerging hundreds of acres in the generosity of its blanket. No ‘gators are around to be seen but we meet some feral pigs – remnants of the 400 bought by some adventurers of old who aimed to walk from Tampa Bay to the Mississippi… the humans didn’t make it but the hogs did.

Rich, thick greens, great oaks resplendent with moss and lichens, snakes, frogs and turtles a-plenty, and an old lady, bristling with keen determination, gathering wild-flower seeds from among the grasses.

Heading back to Bodhi Tree we took the streets through the poorest black neighbourhood – last year riots broke out when the cops shot a black youth in a car – smoky windows, thought he had a gun, opened fire, oops. For three nights they rampaged and fired on police, their cars and helicopters. The place looked very care-worn and reminded me of the face of a boxer who had just gone 15 rounds with Joe Frazier. It will take a while to get it to look human again. Ironically the chief EpiscoPālian cemetery lies right in the epicentre of the ‘hood. As the Africans moved in the Anglos moved out and even dismantled the church and took it with them; “Those poor folk they left there in their graves” was heard in all seriousness – as if the dead were the ones who had to suffer there.

Pulling out of St. Petersburg on the way to Tampa – Emily Dickinson on billboards and brown bunnies by the roadside, selling raunch and ice cream, what a job… Farewells at the airport – Middle America heading north, then “Welcome to Paradise: Newark, New Jersey.”

Georgette and Maxwell are there to greet in a heat more representative of June than March – 85o at 5:30 in the afternoon – blossom is out all round and the shock is obvious. In a rosy brazen glow of sunset we pull into a condo complex in Morristown, to meet the local vipassanā group for tea. An expectant circle – some new, some familiar – and a good talk on matters monastic and attendant themes. The “IMS monastery” idea gets an airing, a formal suggestion of a forest monastery being founded near to IMS having recently been made by Jack Kornfield to their board – ears prick, which is no surprise. Dr. Robert Elswit is mine host.

We pulled into “Go-onji West” – Georgette and Maxwell’s farmhouse in the Sussex countryside – at around 8:45. It is now late; G. & M. have long retired and the night is utterly silent – all but for the rolling of the ball-point on paper and the roaring of Nada in my ears. Long day – many miles.

At the Morristown group, as in the car with Georgette and Maxwell, the conversation centered repeatedly around the purpose of monasteries, what they provide, how they work, and the paucity of certain qualities in the “vipassanā ” circles – it was the same theme that Jim and I fell into at the beach, in our discussion around the direction of Bodhi Tree: when things are run by lay-teachers, and thus phrased and structured according to their own non-renunciate value systems, surely something is being lost from the Teaching and practice.

People ask, “What can we do without a teacher, a center or a monastery? How do we further the practice?” and they ask with great sincerity. How does a lay-teacher aspiring to a comfy, middle-class life-style, then direct them? Inevitably it is towards practice within the mould that they themselves espouse, but is it enough to liberate? Certainly the sameness of life-styles of the teacher and students serves well to foster a closeness – there are no problems because of alienation or remoteness caused by robes or a plethora of precepts – but does that similitude of way of life have its drawbacks too? Never before has Buddha-Dharma been introduced into a society by such a proportion of non-monastics – will it really be introduced?

Amongst the many others facets of this issue, the question charging for the Dhamma comes up again and again. So many of the lay centers and teachers have sincere and genuine reasons for feeling the need to set prices for retreats and teachings – and the prices seem to keep climbing even faster than national rates of inflation – does this mean that there’s a generic lack of faith? Is this the only reasonable way to do it in these times? Is doing everything on freewill donations simply an atavistic reflex, symptomatic of a bygone patriarchal age, as Ken Wilber would have us believe (in his essay ironically entitled “Right Bucks”)? How come monasteries can run solely on dāna and other places not? These are riddles wrapped in mystery that circle around these gatherings; only time and wise reflection will coax the truth forth from them.

I spoke to Georgette and Maxwell of Jack Kornfield’s reservations about dilution and also his movement to “The Way of the Elders” as the generic term of reference, rather than “Vipassanā”; the same issue manifested in Morristown – heads nodded in agreement but can one really expect the forty and fifty-somethings to up sticks, shave heads and move into a mendicant life? Maybe not, but the more the issue gets raised the more we are drawn towards a balanced picture. The heart knows the sound and smell of self-justification.

At the very least those centers and styles of practice are a very accessible entry-point. Georgette and Maxwell recounted how, 30 years ago, no-one had had a clue about Buddhism or meditation – and that was among the students of their Roshi, Isshu Muira. Now huge numbers, increasing exponentially, are at least aware of some of the essential elements of Dharma practice and there is a general groundswell of faith and interest in the Buddha’s teaching.

March 31st

August weather: after breakfast Georgette takes me round the garden and for a visit to the zendo. The outside bell is the (deliberately) fractured wheel of a railroad car – it rings deep and richly like an ancient gong. Inside the small shelter are other calligraphies of Muira Roshi and Niwa Roshi (his Dharma-heir) plus agèd bowl-bells and the most solidly seated Buddha image I have ever seen; red wood and Kamakura style, low to the ground and broad-kneed, it holds the space with ease and a presence of power. She was one of the very few students that Muira Roshi accepted during the years that he taught in New York City, at the First Zen Institute. He had been abbot of Go-onji Temple in Kyoto, one of the pioneers of Buddhism in the US – editor of the journal Cat’s Yawn and author of the acclaimed Zen Dust – and had passed away quite some years before. She invites me to sit in the Roshi’s seat – more than one bird sings…

Round the pond with Maxwell (met the golf-mad neighbour) and got hissed away from the Canada goose’s nest. Clear water, glad fish, grass like a country club lawn. After the meal we head off for some of the sights of Sussex – the town, the highest point of New Jersey and the Hawk’s Nest above the Delaware River. From the summit soft blue hills, tree-clad and farm-speckled, flow off into the distance. They range into New York to the east and north Pennsylvania to the west; the three states meet at Port Jervis, perched on a bend in the great river.

Earlier in the afternoon we had climbed to Indian Rock above their house, along the savage cut of a new road to the site of a neighbour’s hopes for a dream home – gazing out over the broad valley like an agèd brave or warrior chief surveying the breadth of his domain. Now smashed stone and splintered trees mark the way to the spot.

Local features are pointed out – taking in the character of the land – ol’ time rural, East Coast USA for sure – it even had a “field of dreams” baseball diamond at Ideal Farms. Water everywhere; small towns; traffic headed for the mountains, behind us in Pennsylvania. The rock faces at Hawk’s Nest were inscribed with the John Hancocks of the Pepperwood Trolls, sparrow, Joby and Doby and a multitude of other loves and unreadables. Piles of junk dumped over the edge, down on the banks of the Delaware.

We spent the evening watching Ajahn Chah videos: “The Buddha Comes to Sussex,” (yet again) “The Mindful Way” and “Alms-Bowls to Newcastle” – we were so young – 20 years shows its face undeniably. All but Ven. Asabho in the latter film have disrobed now: Ajahn Pabhākaro, Nyānaviro, Thānasīlo, Sobhano and Brian – 20% survival, par for the course. It’s a shock suddenly to see old friends, that have since moved on, back in their monastic apparel again.

It’s by no means uncommon, and certainly no disgrace, to have lived as a monastic for a while and then to have decided to return to lay life. In Thailand, particularly for men, it is considered a necessary part of growing up and developing maturity to takes robes for a while, even if only for a few weeks. In the West a far greater proportion stay on for longer in the monastic form, the motivation to have been ordained in the first place being much more personal than that of social convention, however there is still a sadness in the air – like a death in the family – when someone decides to go back to jeans and T-shirt. As with most things in life, people go into the training with an open mind and a good heart, but if after some years the shoe no longer fits: vat to do? After careful consideration, to move on to a different set of footwear seems the wisest of options.

There were good, inspired chats through the evening – on child murderers, racism, mingling of genes and the nuns’ progenitor – we range over the blue landscapes of mutual experience; trading views and histories, hearing each other’s little griefs and insights.

A full day – and still with the summer heat by late night – it hit 88o at 1:30 this afternoon – a little less than its maximum for mid-summer – I should have held back on the long-johns and brought more sun-screen.

April 1st

Glad I brought the long-johns… by the time we came through the villages south of Barre MA this afternoon, the signs were reading 4o C – icy rain chased us and a chill bite on the neck.

The day leading up to this was spent in many words and movements: a long chatty breakfast and – after a photo at Muira Roshi’s grave – a morning with Vonnegut and Dresden; Nabokov had been the night before.

The cherry outside the house had just begun to bloom, and the star magnolia had doubled its decking of creamy white flowers but, as we pulled out at midday, the glow had definitely gone: we meet endless highways of grey and rain – punctuated by cuts through rock formations, swirled like Viennese chocolate mousses, and a pit stop at McDonald’s south of Hartford CN. Along the undulating ribbon of Hwy 84 we flow like easy light – when we meet some traffic and are brought to a halt we wonder what is up – soon enough the blue flashes and huddle of bodies on the bank, the cars facing the wrong direction and the mashed front of a big grey sedan give us their message: “Joe’s plans for the day have changed.” So it goes. Hi ho.

We finish the journey to the sounds of Ābhassarā’s Requiem; Georgette’s ear finds Gregorian, Indian and Celtic strains in there with the haunting Latin Mass. By the end of “Dawning of Union” we are closing on Barre. A warm welcome from Chris takes us into the Study Center and gets me settled.

Georgette and Maxwell stop for tea and a breather, then head for a restaurant in town: it’s their 36th wedding anniversary today. The two of them are a rare breed – been together so long and still full of love and respect for each other, it has been a delight to dwell in the warm aura of their company. At this time they are thinking to bequeath us their property; if it ever falls out that way it will be an honour to preserve and use the haven they have created – to live beneath the trees they have planted and for their flowers to rise between our toes.

April 2nd

Grey skies and the extra day give plenty of time to check in with Mu Soeng of the Study Center, Taraniyā, old friend and now “resident teacher” at IMS, and Don Sperry, and to prune the vast pile of notes for the study workshop. The hours fly and the work proceeds easily – these kutīs are very conveniently set up: warm, clean, all mod-cons – what else could one wish for. They are the most recent (and welcome) addition to the Barre Center for Buddhist Studies’ facilities.

The Center was begun a few years ago to serve the increasing demand for instruction in Buddhist scriptural teachings. It was not that people wanted a college where they could go to get a degree in Buddhism; the intention behind the foundation of the place was much more to answer the interest that there was in Canonical texts to help support meditation practice and thereby the liberation of the heart.

It’s a very vibrant little enclave and quite different in character to its grand progenitor, IMS, just down the road. BCBS is a centered around an old stone farmhouse. Its gentle swath of lawn reaches down to and around the newly constructed meditation hall and accommodation block, and the three kutīs behind that. The whole array settles far back from the road, up against the margins of thick woodland and rocky meadows. IMS, in contrast, is a redbrick baronial mansion, complete with pillared portico and ante-bellum aura. It has a formality that is hard to shrug off.

After a chat I find out that Don’s mind has changed about coming to Abhayagiri in May – he still has the intention to be with us but he’d like to spend the summer helping Tan Punnadhammo out at Arrow River Community Center, a hermitage outside of Thunder Bay, Ontario.

Mellow day, much solitude. Tan Punna has missed his flight (rapping too long over coffee at the airport) and hopes to appear tomorrow. Hi ho.

April 3rd

The needle stays in the same groove – grey, sombre, cool and notes to pore over. All goes by with ease – Deb in the kitchen is greatly solicitous (giant breakfasts and anxiety over “the night foods”) and is wonderfully kind, Sumi is the other staff member with Chris – she is an IDEA (Inter Departmental Executive Assistant).

Folks for the workshop start to gather: Tan Punna has arrived by 8:30, but after breakfast, and has conked out following a night of sitter’s practice at the airport – he missed his bus as well last night, waiting in the wrong place.

The workshop is almost fully booked (44 plus Tan Punna and I) which is an encouraging sign, although they say that many/most of their programmes are full these days. They have a good selection of Mahāyāna and Theravāda classes ongoing, with Mu Soeng heading up the former, and Andy Olendzki the latter. They are branching out into a week of Vajrayāna this year too. All seems to be flourishing here and they are constantly refining their courses in other ways: they now have a “Bhāvana Program” which is mostly meditation but with a three hour study session in the day as well. It’s all very impressive, and palpably on the right track. There are also moves to do more events on dāna – Ajahn Thanissaro of Metta Forest Monastery in San Diego County ran a workshop this spring like this and the overheads etc. were covered fine. In the future we should push for more of this.

Tan Punna surfaces late afternoon and we chat over tea. He is well and Arrow River is, as usual, just getting by as one steward hands the baton on to the next. He is in good spirits and at ease with the life.

The workshop kicks off at 7:30 and, surprise surprise, there is still more material in the notes than can be got through in one evening – we finish at 10:00 anyway – oh well.

April 4th

Very low key morning sitting – it’s nice to have so little in the way of ceremonials for a change – and then into the splurge of talks and teachings from the Shining Ones. The theme is “The Teachings of the Thai Forest Masters,” including Ajahn Mun, Ajahn Buddhadasa, Ajahn Lee, Ajahn Chah, Ajahn Maha-Boowa and Upasika Kee Nanayon – by the end of the session (at 10:30 p.m.) we are all buzzing fit to light the town of Barre. Add the charge of Joseph Kappel (the former Ajahn Pabhākaro and my first teacher in Thailand) and John Massey (also an ex-monk and composer of blues sutta arrangements) to the mixture and you wind up with a lot of wattage in the air.

Come the evening session, after a bit of history of Ajahn Chah, and the Mindful Way, it’s handed over to Joseph and he fully takes the stage – it’s good to see him in his glory like this, he has a lot to give and is at last (seven years after disrobing, following 20 years of monastic life) finding his voice in the lay universe. A sweet, poignant and unique session, filled with laughter and power. Golden tales of our Venerable Father and his children.

Snow! Falling endlessly in gentle white stellations of the grey air; it falls and falls and falls and never settles – like the ceaseless barrage of perception and thought, sañña and sankhārā, landing in the mind of the Arahant, or rather not landing but dissolving into completion upon contact. Upasika Kee’s mind and diamond-sworded manner fill the morning hours: let go and let go and let go and realize the infinite emptiness of within. There is no other task in life worth doing.

It has been announced that the afternoon session will conclude at 4:00 – after Ajahn Mahā-Boowa and some midrashic sharings. To my amazement – despite the full, bright and zealous energy of the session so far, less than half the folks reappear at 1:30… are they all busy writing? … Another two or three trickle in as the final hours go by but they eventually have no words to offer. After Luang Dah Boowa has said his piece, (complete with the world-stopping, all-dissolving: “If there is a point or center of the knower anywhere, that is the essence of a level of being,”) we take a breather and then cluster (the last 15 or so) for our final sharing. A few sweet jewels come forth – especially Katherine’s “60 holy women,” Sandra’s “Letter to the Ajahns” and Dorothea’s tea-party for all six great ones.

Joseph has more to say and offers useful encouragement on the notion of monasticism in general. Over and over again the theme comes up of introduction of this tradition and method of training to the USA. People are more and more aware that it has been lacking and yet it can’t be introduced into the American psyche overnight. Joseph bemoans the lack of interest and support there has been for monasticism in the US Buddhist scene, but for 95% of the people this is because they have scarcely cognised the existence of it. So I applauded Joseph’s comments but added that, “It takes a long time for such principles to really percolate through society – the 30 years that Buddhism has been in the US public eye is a very short time historically.”

The gathering ends with an enthusiastic taking of the Refuges and Precepts – only the monastic junkies remain – and we’re down to about 12 by now. So it was a radiant and heartful time, luxuriating in the divine presence of the Ajahns, but it was also telling how – even in the face of repeated exhortations on the uncertainty of life and the priority of Dhamma practice, from the voices of those who boom the sound of the Dhamma across the valleys – that so many ignored the exortations to stay and even left earlier than planned. “People are busy, Ajahn…” “I know, but is the Dhamma something that you tack on to your life or something that your life is surrendered to? It seems so reasonable: family, work, schedules, driving long distances… but when is King Yāma going to call?”

Long talk with Joseph, his lady Katherine and the good John Massey at noon. A brief tea break and then the “Monastery Development Circle” met at 7:00 pm. Taraniyā, Perrin, Dorothea, Dona, Sandra, Jaya, Katherine 1, John, Mark Hart, Buzz, Joseph and Katherine 2. A rich meeting, which I was very glad to be at, and out of which came a few clear notes:— Firstly, there is considerable energy within this circle for helping a monastery to be founded here; secondly – Jack having catalysed the process, there was no inclination toward, even an explicit avoidance of, an even remotely “on-campus” monastery at IMS (the “hermit in the folly” is not a desired option); notably there were no IMS folks there (excluding Taraniyā) and little interest had been generally shown by the IMS community in the monastic teachers; thirdly – people were happy with the idea of annual visits of a few weeks/months and saw that the main aspect of the venture was unifying themselves in vision and energy first, then perhaps creating an invitation, should it seem appropriate. Joseph offered to go to England and invite Luang Por to come, teach a retreat and leave someone in 2000; fourthly – Abhayagiri offered to help support the effort with occasional monks here and there but it was made clear that we are not going to assume responsibility for the project.

It was also made clear that 1) it should all be worked in small increments (e.g. “you don’t have to decide on a location now”); 2) the money will appear when it’s needed, if the energy is right; and 3) the purpose of the venture is to end suffering, not to create it.

We were all done by 8:45 – finally the words ran out.

These are great, good-hearted people, wise and skilful, and it felt an honour to be sitting amongst them. Jack had catalysed this discussion, with his suggestion that we found a monastery near IMS, but no-one was going to let blind enthusiasm and wishful thinking rule the day. It was impressive to hear and feel how everyone had sensitivity to the depth of the different issues at play: e.g. monastic resources, finances, friendships and rivalries – so, in the end, there was not a lot for me to add. The wisdom of the group spoke for itself.

April 5th

A long exhalation – breakfast with Tan Punna then a discussion with Libby on the retreat schedule – long digressions on early departures, chemical sensitivity, note writing and the BULLETIN BOARD!! 70 are signed up for the retreat and it’s a 10-day only. We will shoot for incense, candles, everyone at the sittings and no early departures – we will see how the training goes down…

Don Sperry came by after Libby’s departure and – moist-eyed – declared his interest to come to Abhayagiri to go forth. We had had a long rap a few days before on the infinite number of reasons to delay the task and, now having sat on it for a while, the decision arose. It was a brief exchange but potent and gladdening at heart – SĀDHU! – all hail to the aspiration to go forth! Both he and Libby enquired about the previous night’s meeting (he had typed Jack’s letter) – the energy is keen and bright on this issue, for sure.

Tan Punna went to visit the Khmer temple in Leverett with Mark Hart – to call on the blind nun and her companions who visited us last year – so I ate alone and then sauntered over for the session with the IMS volunteer staff mid-afternoon.

The questions they had were a mixture of points on mythology and eclecticism in Silent Rain – Kali and Parsifal in particular – and some confrontational points on the dualism of monastic/lay dynamics. The dependency question – living on alms, not cooking, driving, etc. – and, after that, it was a pleasant relief to go onto the position of women in Theravāda, even though all the discussion went reasonably civilly. The protagonists didn’t seem to be too convinced of my reasoning (surprise surprise) but what can you say? There is a strong feeling that the “Sangha gives food for the heart and the laity food for the body” model is inaccurate or at least incomplete for the current situation in the West. Lay people are living in more meditative ways as yogis at places like IMS so why glorify the robe and relegate the layperson to feeder/driver?… Good question.

Eventually we led the conversation around to, “Do you think people might enjoy driving and cooking for those whom they admire and whose conduct is worthy of honour?”

“Yes.”

“OK. So, if the monastics are living in an inspiring way, then their dependency becomes a ‘field of merit’ for the world. If the conduct is unworthy it’s a barren field – don’t bother with it.”

It was also pointed out that diversity of forms can indeed be a good thing: a sign of health in the system. “Just because I like this form and find it’s right for me, doesn’t mean I feel that other forms are wrong.” It’s an oft-assumed view that, if I chose to do or be something, that I feel that everyone should be and do just like me. People are regularly startled to hear that either you have no opinion about what they chose to believe in and do, or (wonder of wonders!) that you are genuinely glad that others in this world think differently. How could it be that one sole mode of being or set of attitudes served for all humans on the planet? And, even if by some weird happenstance that was the case, the odds against my particular brand of opinions being the No.1 option would be roughly six billion to one.

In short: if it works it’s the right thing.

Weary of talk by the late hours of the day, the evening meets the end of ‘Mason & Dixon’ and some pages of ‘Kalila and Dimna’ – that and the hum of the fridge, the occasional whining blast of the heater and the snowflakes of Nada falling on nada:— Nada nada nada nada and even in Barre – nada.

April 6th

We pack up our belongings and bid our farewells as a bright and fragrant morning covers BCBS. This is a fine center and we gave Mu Soeng our clear, wholehearted “Sādhu” for their efforts.

Andy Miller an old friend and once upon a time an anagarika at Chithurst when I was a monk of 2 Rains, drove us to the City (at least to Dorothea’s), engaging in his mild and sweet manner on the adharmic nature of retirement plans – which I agreed with, with another whole-hearted “Sādhu”! It turns the whole effort of practising and teaching the Dhamma into a very white, middle-class institution: visions of the octogenarian vicar sitting in the conservatory, doing the Times crossword for eternity, entered consciousness. Once, at a Spirit Rock Board meeting, I raised the suggestion of living on faith and trusting that, if you have done right by the Dharma, your students would gather round and look after you – it was a scenario that drew a few blank looks as it was expressed. How could I suggest such a thing?

That it seemed so unimaginable, or likely to provoke reactions of “Good grief, what a totally air-headed, monkish perspective – this guy should get a life…”, is a sign that the favoured mode of life of the Vipassanā teachers is solidly white, educated, middle-class conservative. What about the opportunity to go forth when your duties are done – kāma, artha, dharma, moksha? Who looks forward to being a mountain man in his cabin, listening to his beard grow and being with his bones as they stiffen through the glory of the seasons?

It is true that such faith requires a lot: a readiness to risk enduring the painful, to trust that karma has its result but without written guarantees as to who will provide what where when and how. But that faith also inspires a lot: when people know that you are prepared to go without, or they hear that you have had to bear with hunger or loneliness, the heart leaps to reach out and provide all that can be offered, gladly and without reservation. That trust in human goodness actually calls it into being.

Dorothea welcomes us with her flawless grace and hospitality – Jaya Karlson is there also and, after the meal, when Andy has departed, the Peloponnesian factor comes well to the fore: “Here is the Greek female contingent!” And that was it for the next hour and a half – maps and crumpled histories of Sparta and the Peloponnesian Wars since both of them were from that area (Manyati). I was reminded of the response that the Spartans once made to King Philip of Macedon: quoth he, “Lacedaemeons beware, if I enter your city I will destroy you all and forever establish my sovereignty over you. Your names will be lost to history forever.” Write the city fathers in reply, “‘…if...’.” Apparently the Greek government did the same when told by the Axis powers that they were coming and were asked if they would accept occupation – “No” was the one word reply.

A rich and joyful time rolled by as we headed off to Boston Common, the Park and a walk through town. We dropped Jaya off along the way. The city was in full bloom, with students and secretaries draped all over the lawns, guitarists strumming and branches burdened with the brightness of cherry, almond, magnolia and apple blossom. The human realm in the gladness of spring – strolling, rolling, smooching, playing – the air was warm and bright, inviting stillness of heart, and the nostrils full of the fragrance of muditā. April, love and fertile greens – the arising side of the cycle.

We stroll up Commonwealth Avenue, past memorials for local worthies: by General George on his noble steed, then sailors, politicians and nine firemen, lost together in a tragic blaze, back in ’72. After a spell in Trident Books we amble down Newbury Street – getting more chi-chi, fou-fou with every block. I can’t help noticing how many opticians there seem to be and how every face we meet seems to be dressed with different styles of spectacle – it must be a meaningful item of dress these days for so much juice and $$$ to go into it. Cafés line the street and the outdoor tables are thick with Bostonians, students and city warriors alike. Numerous are the white collar and ties and tight, shoulder padded twin sets, along with the slash-armed skate boarders and gaggles of roller-blading haves.

As we walk along – the late afternoon sun directly behind us – the dream folk who flow towards us squint and blink or peer from behind shades, not quite sure that they are seeing Buddhist monks drifting toward them. The light gives them our silhouette but steals our definition until we are within a few feet. It is strange to see that curiosity – etched with suspicion or excitement, shyness – crystallising on faces as we glide through each other’s consciousness.

Past Cartier, Armani and Versace, Brooks Bros. and Burberry’s and back into the greening park again. Dorothea takes us home to West Newton and, come the evening, a small informal gathering of folk clusters around. Kathy Holmes and partner, Deborah, Janey, Ruthy, Sandra and Perrin, Charlie Bowen, Chris Melton, and who else but the spirit of concord.

Conversation rolls around the concept of the new monastery, Sangha news and the plans for Abhayagiri. A few hours flow by. As Deborah has a two-and-a-half-year- old we touch on the “child-unfriendly” atmosphere of IMS and how monasteries function i.e. “all humans welcome – size irrelevant.” Again, people are keen to hear the results of our monastery circle meeting and the subject of location and time-lines appears again, also the structure of the nuns’ order. Many of these good folk happily pay up their fees and go along to teachings and retreats at different centers, a few, however, are dyed-in-the-wool monastery types and have no heart for the “Dharma for dollars” world. For them the chemistry of the classical mode, where everything is done on faith, is the ingredient that inspires – all the rest, for them, is void of meaning.

By the time 9:00 arrives all head for the door and the great, glad silence reigns again. How sweet to end each day alone and quiet.

April 7th

A vast and varied breakfast was shared with Charlie and Dorothea – most of it permeated, if not completely obscured, by the unravelling of US and Canadian history, the War of Independence, the Ottoman slaves and the drive to the West of the Virginian land-owners; facts and figures still circulating furiously, we wend our way through a bright morning to the house of Buzz and Flora Bussewitz.

Now aged 90, she had just survived a trip to India in February, which had included an operation in the Vellore Missionary Clinic on Arunachala Mountain, on the opposite side to the Sri Ramana Ashram. As had happened in November of the previous year, her guts had seized solid and she had needed to get them ‘de-coked.’ She had been a Christian missionary herself, in the Marati-speaking area of the Indian countryside, when she was in her 20’s; she had left there and had last seen India in the time of Mahatma Gandhi, 62 years previously. Despite the rigors of the journey and the sickness, she never once wanted to be anywhere else. What a great soul.

Completing the circle had been very important for her and Buzz and, although she looked a lot older than last year, she was as in fine a fettle as anyone of 90 could hope to be. She intends to do the 10-day retreat at IMS even though it was only one month ago that they returned from their epic adventure. Sādhu sādhu sādhu!

Jaya and Geof Karlson were there for the morning, as well as a friend of Buzz and Flora from a block or two away. When we spoke after the meal she waxed lyrically on the delight and inspiration “Silent Rain” had given her and, yet again, felt compelled to get clear in her mind the situation for women in Theravāda monasticism.

This question fills the air in these parts like the pollen from the cherries and the forsythia – everywhere you turn. It speaks from a place of brightness and blossoming hope but it also causes a few sneezes here and there. It always makes a difference when people are informed of some of the heavier rules and their restrictiveness – e.g. never travelling alone or sleeping more than an arm’s distance from another nun outside the monastery. “Who would want to live that way?”

‘I also voiced publicly, for the first time, my pet theory that perhaps the Buddha knew that the discipline necessary for the women of his age would not be appropriate later on, so he built in the obsolescence clauses of 1) the nuns needing always to live near town in an enclosure – the upasaya – and not be forest-dwelling wanderers; and especially 2) that an acarinī, an elder nun who was a teacher, could only ordain two sāmanerīs (novices) per year as fully-fledged bhikkhunīs. Given the general fall-out rate of juniors, you don’t have to be a statistician to work out that the gross number would drop off sooner or later. This would cause the original Bhikkhunī Order to fade out and then make it necessary for women and monks of later periods to sculpt an appropriate discipline themselves. Hence the Siladharā (the Nuns’ Order that has been crafted at Amaravati Monastery in England, by Ajahn Sumedho and the Sangha there) could be exactly according to the vision of the Buddha – who knows?

Of course this is complete speculation, arguably heretical to boot – and second-guessing the Buddha is probably fated to be always wide of the mark – however, it is worth taking a moment to consider what his reasoning might have been when he laid down these kinds of strictures on the women’s Order.

He was well-aware of the need to keep his system of training adaptable to other times and cultures, and he established the mahā-padesa rules (the Four Great Standards) to facilitate this. Furthermore, it’s conceivable that he realised that the position of women in society was going to be so variable from place to place and over the ages, and also such a tender and heated issue, that he placed such tight limits on the order so that it would naturally need to be regenerated virtually from scratch in every locale it migrated to. Perhaps he trusted the wisdom of coming eras to craft the training of women according to their own time and culture; certainly, since the Theravāda lineage of nuns died out 1000 years ago in Sri Lanka, that is exactly what is happening within our culture now. Elder nuns from the Northern tradition, Theravādan women, ordained (such as Ayya Khemā) and lay, plus some monks sympathetic to the plight of women aspirants (e.g. H.H. the Dalai Lama) have all been joining forces to find ways to enable a valid and viable monastic training for women to be established in the Theravādan world.

It’s certainly a painful and demanding process but it’s one that bears great hope with it as well: by many people wisely and patiently working with the confusing array of contingent elements, something great and noble is enabled to spring forth.

The afternoon turns cool and we go for a walk in the Arnold Arboretum, where Buzz Snr. spent much of his latter years as a docent and photographer of plants. Along with Buzz’s relationship with his mother having been brought to greater balance and ease in recent years – particularly in his devotedly taking her “home” to India – his somewhat fraught connection with his father was now transforming itself via Buzz being entrusted with the 15,000 beautiful transparencies of the entire flora, in all seasons, of the Arboretum – his father’s great legacy.

How sweet an irony that this is how the bond gets to be worked out and brought to some completion too. To make sure that, somehow, the fruits of so many hours, months and years of loving labour do not just turn into forgotten piles of mottled plastic. Lineages get passed on in strange ways, and sometimes it’s only by operating at a distance that we can cope with what is handed to us – or maybe more that it’s only when we chose to accept the bequest rather than have it thrust down our throats, that it’s value can be revealed to us. Buzz confessed that, once his father had died, he realised he was actually quite interested in plants – even glad to know their Latin names that his Dad had belaboured him with.

We move on to Cambridge Insight Meditation Center for a get-together with Larry Rosenberg, Michael Grady and Narayan before the evening talk at 7:00. I said “You look well”, but in truth, at first, I hardly recognised him – he looked older, heavier and strangely subdued. It was only late in the evening that we learned that his step-daughter had, without any warning, committed suicide one month before. Despite the cordiality and warmth of welcome – the first thing he said was, “You realise that the future of Theravāda Buddhism in this country lies with you – or at least with your lineage….” – our chat was somewhat fragmented. They kept disappearing one by one to go in for interviews with their Board members and Larry’s heart was obviously somewhat distracted – we would start a theme and then, in mid-subject, he would leap to a different topic. It all made sense when he told us later on what had happened; he seemed as though he had been kicked in the guts and was in shock, depressed and grieving. He had obviously been deeply humbled by the whole affair – such an abrupt appearance by the Messenger tears us out of our comfortable programs and shakes our priorities into a different order. So much turns to chaff in our mouths and the heart is filled with “all that might have been…”

The talk was entitled “Action in a World of Contemplation” (a direct rip-off from Thomas Merton) and seemed to go down well. It was a play on the theme: the body is in the mind, not vice versa, and the implications that focussing on the “still” v. the “flowing” element of experience brings. I also pulled maranasati (the contemplation of death) well into the fore as the presence of it was already in the room “Where are you going, Sam? What are you doing?”

Sandra and Perrin take Tan Punna and I off into a rainy night – leaving the last remaining questioner stranded with his – “Well I’m teaching more and more these days but I’m uncomfortable talking about ‘ending becoming’ and ‘not wanting to be reborn’ – I want to be! I don’t want to get out of life…” Being given an answer based on the questions of Upasiva and Anuradha, and Vaccagotta and fire – teachings that the Buddha gave to dispel accusations of nihilism and to define the limits of the expressible – he drew in his horns and became quiet, uncertain but reflective: this is a major attack on the compulsive, life-affirming reflex of the USA.

Things have really changed very little since the Buddha himself had to assert so strongly – “I do not teach the annihilation of an existing being and those who say I do basely and falsely misrepresent the Tathāgata; what I teach is suffering and the end of suffering – it is with ignorance as condition that formations come to be…” and so on through the whole pattern of Dependent Origination. The Middle Way is a fine fine whisker of a line.

The Buddha was used to being misunderstood and taken for an annihilationist, but he was not going to avoid that just by appearing to be a life-affirmer. The truly radical approach that he took was instead to be an experientialist: the experience of life is like this; all things arise and cease; all things are not self.

Rainy night, pitch black along the light-strewn highway. Wipers flash and thump, wheels roll, the road goes nowhere, finally bringing us to Concord.

April 8th

A calm spring day with Sandra, Perrin, their sweet pooch Puñña and Joseph Kappel joining us for breakfast. A major exposition on microwave aerials for carphones grabs our minds.

T’other side of Concord, Joseph takes us for a walk around a local pond, through the woods and then around to his home to view “Fractal Geometry: the colours of infinity,” complete with classic Pink Floyd background music and Arthur C. Clarke as narrator. Deep, deeper, deeper the patterns of the universe unfold from z = z2 + C and refuse to bottom out – there is the zeal of the kids who found the treasure in these guys. Unfolding, spiralling, rippling, multiplying in an infinity of natural forms – we are closing in on the geometry of consciousness. Mind, matter, self and nature all intermingle in the inexhaustible quadrilles of the Mandelbrot Set. Tales of Gödel, Feigenbaum and Hofstadter dazzle Joseph as we return, Russell and Whitehead, systems theory and the self-reflective essence of Nature’s heart – Dhamma aware of itself is the consummation of our being.

As if the journeys to infinity had not been enough, the afternoon finds us at the Omni-dome going up Everest with the Imax crew of Krakauer/Hall/Fisher/Breashears infamy. The film is on in Boston and in, or under, we go. Having seen the book Into Thin Air by Jon Krakauer, and the National Geographic piece, had no effect on the enormity of the impact. Revisiting those brave, tragic, poignant episodes – seeing the people in action there – brought the same mixed feelings again. How grand and compassionate the human heart can be, and how blind, drunk and obsessed it can be too. This team made it – it’s leader (David Ventours) without oxygen – perhaps they closed the circle for the others. Perhaps, and I suspect it’s so, the wounds of family and friends and those whose bodies froze to the mountain, will ache and suppurate for long years to come. Without Dhamma as a healing agent, by whatever name we know it, ragged gashes will get ripped open in the same places again and again.

Farewells to Sandra, Perrin and Puñña and off to IMS with Taraniyā. Rain again in the dark. Silence and settling in.

April 9th

Early morning finds Taraniyā driving Tan Punna and I to St. Joseph’s Abbey in Spencer, about half an hour from IMS. Father Kevin Hunt, also involved in the Christian/Buddhist event in the Bay Area next year, appears to greet us and show us around. Quite by chance we bump into the vivacious Carol, who had been on the BCBS week-end and who had been a devotee of this monastery for 30 years.

The monastery buildings were erected virtually all at the same time, ’51 – ’53, and are built completely out of round, flat field stone. “Oh how poor, how wonderful, how poor” said their abbot-general in Rome, hearing that the place was built from rocks monks had gathered; apparently he nearly had a fit when he actually saw the finished article – it’s a very smart facility.

Corridor after corridor, chamber after chamber, cloister after cloister we are taken around – here a Renaissance Madonna, there a St. Anne done by “The Master of Sienna,” a 16th Century Spanish crucifix and a 2nd Century Roman well-head – antiquities and priceless treasures litter the place. Holy nick-knacks that had accrued over the years so that Father Kevin scarcely noticed them any more.

Many of the brothers seemed aged but the abbot was a man of perhaps 50 and had only been in office a couple of years – Fr Thomas Keating, now in Snowmass, Colorado, was his predecessor. Fr Basil Pennington is also one of the 80 or so official residents although he is on the road a lot these days. The resident community numbers about 65 – 70 (without guests) with a sprinkling of 20- and 30-somethings amongst them.

We were all very impressed by the similarities of our lifestyles – apparently, when Sazaki Roshi came there to visit he said, “If you just changed the colour of the robes it would be the same as our monasteries.” Their ordination procedures, novitiate, etc., all bore a striking resemblance to our tradition – their livelihood programmes, however, were a very different scene. Their “Trappist Preserves” operation fills a warehouse the size of IMS’s meditation hall with jams and jellies. We were stunned. Their farming had almost ceased, we heard, apart from Father Raymond’s few sheep, it no longer being economical to run. They also had a department doing vestment production – not a big market you might imagine – but they seemed to make quite a tidy profit from it and 16 monks and some lay women helpers are kept at the job full time.

The place was constructed very closely to the classical Cistercian model and had the feel – despite its newness – of having been dropped there from medieval Europe onto the New England landscape. It felt like a vibrant community and the simplicity and integrity of their lifestyle was impressive. It being Holy Week everyone we encountered was on their way someplace – usually to the next rehearsal – so we did not have a lot of sit-and-chat time. Also, as is well known, the Trappists are not noted as conversationalists, unless there is some pressing cause to speak.

Bright weather has settled in and the afternoon was spent curled up with “The Story of the Stone” – revisiting Vol. 1 before passing it on to Ajahn Sumedho, he being a since he was a child Sinophile. Hours drift by – last details are sorted out with Taraniyā and Libby, including giving Taraniyā the Eight Precepts and putting her in white again.

Come 8:30 the ship is launched – maybe 70 – 80 people on board. I made an appeal not to have any week-enders so we will be able to keep a more consistent routine, and have less shifting…

It feels good to be back in the saddle again: some familiar faces from last year, some quite new: Rachel Mend Ropp is front and center and Sandra, Perrin, Dorothea and Jaya are close by. There is a bold and beaming energy in the air and the Eight Precepts are taken with considerable vim – both surprising and gladdening to see.

April 10th

Saturday slides by, marked only be a chance encounter with Joseph Goldstein on the Path and a bout of hay-fever in the afternoon. We hit it with a vigorous blast of Vitamin C and anti-histamines and by the evening pūjā it has itself gone into retreat. Tan Punna kindly took up the reins and gave a fine talk – including a piece on “diligent effortlessness,” a close cousin of the “undistracted non-meditation” of Tsoknyi Rinpoche. Apparently it was a phrase that Khema Ānanda (Tan Punna’s teacher) used frequently – we’ll get some mileage out of these two before we’re done.

April 11th

Resurrection day comes and goes – Vitamin P for early cocktail, does the trick. Each day at breakfast, tea and the meal different folks appear for a chat. We see a lot of Jan Angevine and Libby, but most others pop in here and there. Edwin and Myoshin Kelley have both put their backs out moving into their new accommodations by Gaston Pond – Goose Landing.

Still morning and clear skies, the forest path is cool under foot. Squirrels scurry and squeak their mysterious chatterings to each other. Bird calls rebound from the silent pines.

Night arrives – time for Dependent Origination and the 3 great questions: a) where did I come from? b) where am I going? c) what am I supposed to do now? Shamelessly ripped off from Brother David but adapted to the new context of the Four Noble Truths and Paticca Samuppāda. We’ll see how everyone took it.

April 12th

Another bright day. Joseph Kappel joins us at the meal time and takes part in the Q & A session in the late afternoon. It has a good energy and the whole body of the retreat seems in good shape – keen, energetic and good-humoured. At tea-time we take a walk along one of the nearby roads, the sun is dropping and the light turns to a softer shade of gold. We talk of mutual friends and the state of his life, his relationship to the Sangha and the need to boost the monastic presence in the USA.

Come the evening he gives the Dhamma talk and, weaving it into his own saga, speaks to the same issue: how monasteries function, the power of the Five Precepts as a guide for life and his own finding of his feet outside institutional life. He speaks with power and conviction –it’s good to see him so confident in himself again. The crowd obviously appreciates what he has to say, and also the process of his journey. Post facto he comes to my room and gives a foot massage – we get onto the subject of MIA/POWs and “Kiss the Boys Goodbye.” He had never heard of the book so I went into some detail recounting some of the particularly startling facts the author Monika Jensen-Stevenson presented on how and why the US Government wants us to believe all the Boys who are alive are already home….

It’s late by the time we finish – it has been a good day – the heart glows at having had the chance to repay some of Big Joe’s kindnesses by giving him the floor and publicly acknowledging him as my first Buddhist teacher.

April 13th

Tuesday comes and goes – blue blue skies and warm earth underfoot – we start the interviews and folks seem quite shy. Sharon came by at tea (Joseph Goldstein cried off, being too busy with his samadhi) and we spent an hour together on the mysteries of the “book tour” and some conversation on her experiences of teaching in Russia. I told her I expect to be there for Christmas and offered to give a talk or somesuch for the group in Moscow. How it will all take shape remains to be seen. She seemed in very good spirits and, along with most other people, asked how the “monastery circle” meeting went. She too is supportive of the project but it’s by no means a primary concern.

Bodywise the mucus element is in full glory; the trick seems to be balancing the flow of snot and sneezes on the one hand and stupefaction from antihistamine pills on the other. My head is blank through the evening sitting and so I give a talk on “Thinking and Not Thinking” – hard to keep the thread going and to avoid repetition. Oh well – at least all the basic, necessary information got put out there on papañca (conceptual proliferation) yoniso-manasikāra (wise reflection) and enquiry.

April 14th

The morning chanting on Wednesday was a snot-clogged affair but we soldiered through. I’m deeply grateful that I am able to use the mike to make my voice heard as the leader. The group really gives it full voice – 18-syllable Pāli phrases and all – it’s a gladdening sign for the general acceptance of these forms into Buddhist practice in this country. I have certainly never experienced such vigour outside the monastery before. A few of the folks have issues about bowing – but, in the land of the free individual that’s pretty normal.

A cooler, overcast day at first but the interview groups are brighter – most of the people seem to be working with the different practices with some skill. One or two have split: (1) had AIDS and was coming down with pneumonia; (2) dog had had an emergency operation (3) non-compatible with Dhamma. Par for the course – no blame.

Taraniyā gave the evening talk with a host of neat vignettes on “ill-will.” She is a very personable and gifted teacher. We’re still needing to encourage all the folks to show for the morning pūjā – we’ll also see how many we can persuade to stay to the close. A few already have their rides booked for early morning Sunday – perhaps we should bill the closing blessing as an Empowerment and Dharma Transmission Ritual, which it is, perhaps in need of some more fancy PR to get the zeal element to engage with it.

April 15th

Hay-fever, snot-trickles and tickling throat proceed purposefully along – inconvenient but not unbearable. It just means that there’s no inclination to give instructions during the sittings for fear of explosive coughs into the microphone. It’s no great loss as there’s usually little to say by this time – so much guidance having been given already. All seems even-paced and the interviews are lively and full of useful questions. By the end of the afternoon stint we had dealt with fundamentalism, globalisation and the future of humanity – not bad for a day’s work.

Edwin Kelley, the IMS director, came by for the tea and we spent a good couple of hours together. Mostly we spoke of IMS and how things are developing here: the plans for the new Longterm Practice Center, The Forest Refuge, in the woods between IMS and the Study Center and the structure of life at IMS itself. It was interesting how clearly Edwin saw the place as trying to provide an efficient service to people and that the employment of more paid staff, contracting out such things as lawn-mowing, and the reduction of volunteer staff to less than 10 people, was all part of the “improvements.” A little murmur was felt in my heart, however, as so many times, in our efforts to do things better/more efficiently/effectively, we spoil the very quality of what we’re doing. The ethos of what’s provided exists within how it’s provided and if “spiritual community” is to be dropped in favour of “efficient management/professional institution” something very special is going to be lost in the process. Witness the caustic remarks made about the polish and style of such places as Esalen these days. It’s not just a question of worshipping the funky, down-at-heel good old days but looking at our core priorities – what do we want to offer to the world as the heart of the Buddha’s dispensation? Would the Master be pleased with what he saw here? Is it to be Insight Meditation Society or I.M. Systems Inc.? What should we look out for in the development of Abhayagiri? Will we be facing the same dilemmas 20 years down the track?

Right now there is no vestige of thought to run Abhayagiri with employees and charges. Like most monasteries it’s a public space: everyone is welcome as long as they respect the place and keep the Precepts. There is no need to register or pay. As a member of the public you can show up for teachings or not, as you chose, come and go when you like. If you want to stay overnight you need to find out from the guest master if there is space. But even if you have stayed for three months and eaten the monastery’s food every day, no one would even think of glancing in the donations box to see if you gave anything. It’s not like that… now… Let’s plan to keep it this way.

We spent a little time talking about Abhayagiri, Edwin was very impressed with the plans we had had to draw up for our Change of Use Permit. He took them off to make a copy or two for ideas re: the new long-term retreat center. We also broached the Massachusetts monastery question somewhat but, having put so much time into the other issues, we only skated the surface. Not that, at this stage, there’s much to say; I was also glad to have it played down as IMS is not a particularly desired location for most of the Circle.

The evening talk, apropos of a couple of issues that came up in the interviews, was the familiar exposition on “Spiritual Friendship/Relationships.” It seemed to go down well, even though the “Piyajātika Sutta’ was a main feature, also Visākhā and the grand-daughter … not much sleep … too high revs and howling coyote packs – oh well.

April 16th

Grey and rain, April’s grasses drink it up and flowers blush with the touch. Interviews are over in the morning so I spend the whole afternoon sitting in the hall. Powerful peace and occasional explosions when the mind moves to desire objects of future scams – oscillating between the questions:

Is this a person?

and

Where is the mind?

Wordless floating joy!

We have a questions session to close the afternoon but I am still not quite with it until halfway through – so it goes. The rest was rich and a hoot.

Highly charged at tea time – discussing with Buzz and Taraniyā the IMS “improvement” issues – glad that Tan Punna is doing the evening talk. He puts out a good line on why the emphasis on “dukkha” (which a few voices had complained about) and many handy hints on practice outside the retreat situation. Stressing the Five Precepts as the mainstay of sustained happiness. Flat batteries by the end of the day – for once I recline before 10:00 and go out like a light.

April 17th

Morning reflections on having no future and spreading kindness and forgiveness through the world. After breakfast it’s backed up with a “cancel your plans to leave early” speech. The troops are shocked but one or two will see the virtue of placing Dhamma before diaries. I told the story of Andrew on the Santa Rosa ’96 retreat: a young man who had vowed to me he would not go crazy or run away, made the mistake of falling madly in love (for the first time) before the retreat began. On the Thursday morning he was seen rushing from the hall; a little while later he was sheepishly asking the manager for jumper cables. He had got as far as his car to make the getaway but only to find a dead battery –

No escape.

Robert Armagno came from upstate New York to take the Five Precepts and Brent from Alabama came to ask for monastic training (someday). He’s a bright, bright light but, at 22, has the confusion of a dozen different elements in his Plans. With a bit of luck he’ll make it out to Abhayagiri one day but I expect the journey will have a few surprise side-trips in it for him. Burning with a mission to enlighten and save the planet (after 10 – 20 years of monastic training) I assured him was a long, long shot but I admired his purity of heart and zeal.

We instituted “Noble Speech” after the Sharing of Blessings and then had tea with Tara and Dan Goleman, who had come to visit. Tara wanted to pick my brains on the transformation of negative emotions for her coming book on the subject Emotional Alchemy. We ranged long and wide; from Buddhism in China to yoniso manasikāra, Dependent Origination, fear of letting go, Anglo-friendly Dharma language (“emptiness”/”dukkha”/”desire,” etc.) and a host of other aspects. Fortunately she had a tape running. We only had a couple of hours and yet we covered an ocean of material; we finished up with the puggala paññati (the catalogue of human types) and the Buddha families; what to do with greed/hate/delusion types, and their negative and positive aspects. We decided that mohacarita (deluded types) were the hardest to teach and that perhaps the positive side of that tendency was the ability to be pleased/agree with anything.

We gave the evening over to Dharma sharings and had a regal session – lasting at full energy until 10:15. The grandiloquent and the poignant, the simple and the wise, the grateful and the farcical, the opening of the eyes.

April 19th

A morning full of re-integrations and reminders. We played Heng Yin’s “Songs for Awakening” during the morning sit and filled the crew with more encouragement to stay until the end. It seems that many had heeded the advice and most that did leave, did so with sincere apologies. One or two incorrigibles slipped through and a few that life necessitated.

By the end of the morning ceremonies and the post-prandial goodbyes (there must have been 30 – 40 people squashed in the yoga room) my jaw was aching with all the smiling and good-will expressions. For a moment it seemed that another infinity of questions had started and I wondered if we were ever going to escape. None were leaving and more were arriving – finally we moved the gears and the farewells began. It may have just been the size of the retreat but there seemed to be a huge number of very heartfelt eulogies. We finally hit the road at 3:00, with Jaya, Libby, Sandra, Perrin, Buzz and Tan Punna in attendance.

The journey to New York was with Gina Sharpe, her husband John Fowle and their friend Jill Satterfield (all of whom had been on the retreat) and largely retraced the Hwy 85 route from Sussex. Along the way John plied me with a stream of enquiries about the Amaro history and life as a monk. I was blinking and badly jaw-ached by the time we arrived in Westchester County.

At first it was hard to get much of a sense of the locale as it seemed very like the forest/lake/freeway pattern found all the way through this region. However, as we pulled off the highway around Bedford and Mount Kisco it was clear that this was a very well-heeled area. John insisted that, at 4,000 sq. ft., their house was a very small one for the area (the record stands at 37,000 sq. ft., for a family of five, being built at present).

Nevertheless their house was a delight to the eyes as we rolled in and an ever unfolding set of treats as I was shown around. Famous for being the former home of Sir Stephen Spender, Gian Carlo Menotti and Samuel Barber, it had also housed JFK and Jackie overnight on some remote occasions.

Star-magnolia and flowering cherries, bright forsythias and purple azalea punctuate the walks. Tall, well-groomed pines stretch up from the lawns and a rock garden with Buddha and waterfall tumble down from the hillside behind. Everywhere in the house the eye falls upon thangkas, scroll paintings and Buddha-rupas – like some latter day Pure Land, countless Tathāgathas spreading in all directions – the rooms are also framed by huge banks of windows and skylights, merging the inner and outer geographies together. A land of devas devoted to the Blessed One – what a delight to roam their halls.