# Chapter 1

AJAHN SUMEDHO 5
A NOTE BEFORE YOU BEGIN
This book contains a collection of teachings that Ajahn 
Sumedho gave in the 1980s (with the exception of 
‘Investigating the Mind’, which was given in 1979). As you 
will deduce from the people who are referred to, some talks 
were addressed to the monastic community at Amaravati
during their Winter Retreat of 1988.
In the monastic retreats, Ajahn Sumedho would often 
develop a theme from the Buddha’s teaching over a couple 
of months, linking it to other aspects of the Dhamma, 
embellishing it with accounts of his personal experiences, 
demonstrating its relevance to the society in general, or 
using it as an exhortation to the Sangha to live up to their 
aspiration of awakening. Although it is not possible to render 
the tonal depth and variety of these talks in a printed work, 
the mixture of short exhortations and pointers, and longer 
contemplative reflections, mingled with the chants that the 
monks and nuns would recite daily may suggest the atmosphere 
of the monastery, as well as the contemplative background
against which the teachings were offered.
During this monastic retreat, Ajahn Sumedho offered reflec -
tions based on the dependent origination ( paṭiccasamuppāda) 
teaching of the Buddha. The dependent origination traces the 
process whereby suffering (dukkha) is compounded out of ignorance (avijjā), and conversely suffering is eliminated (or rather

THE W AY IT IS

not created) with the cessation of ignorance. Ajahn Sumedho 
suggests that in terms of direct experience, ignorance is the il -
lusion of selfhood, the conceit ‘this is what I am, this I am not’, 
that is a prime condition for the arising of suffering.
This sense of identity can be detected in a latent state as selfconsciousness, or as a habitual mood of the mind – such 
as conceit or self-criticism – or it can manifest as selfish 
bodily or verbal activity. The profundity of the dependent 
origination is that it describes how even at its most passive, 
this ‘self-view’ initiates habitual actions ( kamma) and attitudes 
through which even a silent and well-intentioned meditator
experiences suffering. 
These habitual actions range from sustained thoughts, 
inclinations and attitudes on the ‘internal’, psychological 
plane to the ‘outer’ realm of verbal and bodily action. All such 
intentional activity is termed saṅkhāra . Even moral action 
based on self-view can lead to anxiety, doubt, ‘sorrow, grief, 
pain, lamentation and despair.’ Such is the meaning of the first 
‘link’ of dependent origination ‘ avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā’, or 
‘dependent on ignorance are kammic formations.’
In its most complete formulation, dependent origination is 
expressed as:
‘avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṁ, 
viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṁ, nāmarūpapaccayā 
saḷāyatanaṁ saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso, phassapaccayā 
vedanā, vedanāpaccayā taṇhā, taṇhāpaccayā 
upādānaṁ, upādānapaccayā bhavo, bhavapaccayā 
jāti, jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṁ soka- paridevadukkha-domanassupāyāsā sambhavanti, evametassa 
kevalassa dukkhakkhandhāsa samudayo hoti.’

AJAHN SUMEDHO

This deals with the arising of dukkha . The cessation of dukkha 
is then mapped out:
‘avijjāyatveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho, 
saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho, viññāṇanirodhā 
nāmarūpanirodho, nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho, 
saḷāyatananirodhā phassanirodho, phassanirodhā 
vedanānirodho, vedanānirodhā taṇhānirodho, taṇhānirodhā 
upādānanirodho, upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho, 
bhavanirodhā jātinirodho, jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṁ 
soka-parideva-dukkha-domanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti, 
evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhāsa nirodho hoti’
In English this can be translated as: ‘Dependent on ignorance 
are habitual formations; dependent on habitual ( kamma) 
formations is consciousness; dependent on consciousness 
are name-and-form (mentality-corporeality); dependent on 
name-and-form are the six sense-bases; dependent on the 
six sense-bases is contact; dependent on contact is feeling; 
dependent on feeling is desire; dependent on desire is 
grasping; dependent on grasping is becoming; dependent 
on becoming is birth; dependent on birth is old age, sickness
and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
‘Through the entire ceasing of this ignorance habitual 
formations cease; through the ceasing of habitual formations 
consciousness ceases; through the ceasing of consciousness 
name-and-form cease; through the ceasing of name-andform the six sense-bases cease; through the ceasing of the six 
sense-bases contact ceases; through the ceasing of contact 
feeling ceases; through the ceasing of feeling desire ceases; 
through the ceasing of desire grasping ceases; through the 
ceasing of grasping becoming ceases; through the ceasing

THE W AY IT IS

of becoming birth ceases; through the ceasing of birth old 
age, sickness and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief 
and despair come to cease. Thus is the ceasing of this whole
mass of suffering.’
There are many forms of dependence that are concerned 
in this analysis. It is helpful to remember that paccaya can 
mean ‘dependent on’, ‘supports’ or ‘conditions’. It does not 
necessarily mean ‘creates’. For example one could say ‘walking 
is dependent on legs’ or ‘ice is dependent on water’ or ‘catching 
the train is dependent on getting to the station at the right 
time’ or even ‘the view is dependent on the non-appearance of 
intervening objects.’ Understanding this, the contemplative 
begins to realize that just as ‘arising dependence’ need not 
mean ‘creation’, the ‘cessation’ so valued by the Buddha need 
not mean ‘annihilation’, but may also be understood as ‘comes 
to rest’ or ‘doesn’t create anything.’ So in this lifetime, when 
nibbāna is to be realized, mentality-corporeality can ‘cease’ – i.e. 
the identification with physical and mental kamma-formations 
can cease so that life is no longer lived from the pleasure/pain 
principle dictated by the senses (nāma-rūpa-saḷāyatana-phassavedanā-taṇhā). In this spirit one could interpret the sequence 
in a more fluid way, for example:
‘T o the extent to which ( paccaya) the mind has not comprehended ( avijjā) Truth, habitual drives ( saṅkhāra) manifest 
and condition ( paccaya) awareness into a discriminative 
mode ( viññāṇa) that operates in terms of ( paccaya) subject 
and object ( nāmarūpa) held ( paccaya) to exist on either side 
of the six sense-doors ( saḷāyatana). These sense-doors open 
dependent ( paccaya) on contact ( phassa) that can arouse 
(paccaya) varying degrees of feeling (vedanā). Feeling stimulates

AJAHN SUMEDHO

(paccaya) desire ( taṇhā) and, according to ( paccaya) the power 
of desire, attention lingers ( upādāna) and so personal aims 
and obsessions develop ( bhava) to give ( paccaya) rise to self
consciousness ( jāti). That self-consciousness, mental or 
physical, once arisen must follow ( paccaya) the cycle of 
maturing and passing away ( jarā- maraṇa) with the resultant 
sense of sadness ( soka) varying from sorrow ( parideva) 
to depression ( domanassa), to anguish ( dukkha) and
emotional breakdown (upāyāsa).
‘When the mind looks into the sense of loss and comprehends 
Truth ( avijjā-nirodha), habitual drives cease ( saṅkhāranirodha) and the awareness is no longer bound by 
discrimination ( viññāṇa-nirodha); so that the separation of 
the subject and object is no longer held ( nāmarūpa-nirodha) 
and one does not feel trapped behind or pulled out through 
the six sense-doors ( saḷāyatana-nirodha). The sense-doors 
open for reflection, rather than being dependent on contact 
(phassa- nirodha) and impingement does not impress itself into 
the mind ( vedanā-nirodha). So there is freedom from desire 
(taṇhā-nirodha) and attention does not get stuck ( upādānanirodha) and grow into selfish motivations (bhava-nirodha) that 
centre around and reinforce the ego ( jāti-nirodha). When no 
personal image is created, it can never bloat up, nor can it be 
destroyed ( jarā-maraṇa-nirodha). So there is nothing to lose,
a sense of gladness, uplift, joy and serenity ( soka-paridevadukkha- domanassupāyāsa-nirodha).’
With the cessation of such a death-bound frame of reference 
there is the living of the true life, the holy life, of which Ajahn 
Sumedho so evocatively speaks.
Ajahn Sucitto
1990  (revised 2025)

THE W AY IT IS

1   |   HAPPINESS FOREVER
We have been meditating, watching our breath, contemplating 
the inhalation and the exhalation. We’re using bare attention, 
mindfulness of the body while walking, standing, sitting and 
lying down. Rather than becoming fascinated, we’re opening 
the mind to conditions as they are at the present time.
Notice how even in a beautiful place like this we can really 
make ourselves miserable. When we are here we might want 
to be somewhere else; when we are walking we might want to 
be sitting; when we are sitting we might want to be walking. 
When we are meditating, we are thinking what we’ll do after 
the retreat. Then after the retreat we wish we were back here … 
Hopeless, isn’t it?
Before you came to this retreat, you may have been having 
problems at home and thinking, ‘I can hardly wait until I go 
on retreat.’ And then here you wish, ‘I can hardly wait for the 
retreat to end.’ Maybe you become very tranquil sitting there 
and thinking, ‘I want to be like this all the time’, or you try to 
attain that blissful state you had yesterday but instead become 
more and more upset. When you achieve these nice blissful 
states you grasp them, but then you have to get something to 
eat or do something, so you feel bad at losing the blissful state. 
Or maybe you haven’t been having any blissful states at all, just

AJAHN SUMEDHO

a lot of miserable memories, anger and frustration arising. But 
everyone else is blissful, so you feel upset because everybody 
else seems to be getting something from this retreat except you
This is how we begin to observe that everything changes. Then 
we have the possibility to observe how we create problems, 
attach to the good or create all kinds of complexities around the 
conditions of the moment; wanting something we don’t have, 
wanting to keep something we have, or wanting to get rid of it. 
This is the human problem of desire; we’re always looking for 
something else.
I remember as a child wanting a certain toy. I told my mother 
that if she got me that toy I’d never want anything ever again. It 
would completely satisfy me. And I believed it, I wasn’t telling 
her a lie; the only thing that was stopping me from being really 
happy then was that I didn’t have the toy I wanted. So my 
mother bought the toy and gave it to me. I managed to get some 
happiness out of it for maybe five minutes … and then I had 
to start wanting something else. So in getting what I wanted 
I felt some gratification and happiness, but then desire for 
something else arose. I remember this so vividly because at that 
young age I really believed that if got that toy I wanted, I would 
be happy forever … only to realize that ‘happiness forever’
was an impossibility.

THE W AY IT IS

2   |   RETURNING TO THE  
 WAY THINGS ARE
T oday is the full moon of January and the beginning of 
our Winter Retreat. We can have an all-night meditation 
sitting tonight to commemorate the auspiciousness of the 
occasion. It’s very fortunate to have an opportunity such 
as this to devote ourselves for two months to one-pointed
reflection on Dhamma.
The teaching of the Buddha is the understanding of The 
Way Things Are – being able to look, to be awake. It means 
developing attentiveness, brightness, and wisdom – developing 
the Eightfold Path, which we call bhāvanā.
Now when we’re reflecting on things as they are, we’re ‘seeing’, 
rather than interpreting through a veil of self-view. The big 
obstacle all of us have to face is this insidious belief in the ‘I am’ 
– attachment to self-view. It’s so ingrained in us that we’re like 
fish in the water: water is so much a part of the fish’s life that 
it doesn’t notice it. The sensory world we’ve been swimming 
in since our birth is like that for us. If we don’t take time to 
observe it for what it really is then we’ll die without getting any 
the wiser. But this opportunity as a human being has the great 
advantage for us of our being able to reflect – we can reflect

AJAHN SUMEDHO

on the water we’re swimming in. We can observe the sensory 
realm for what it is. We’re not trying to get rid of it. We’re not 
complicating it by trying to add to it – we’re just being aware of 
it as it is. We’re no longer deluding ourselves by appearances, by 
fears, desires and all the things we create in our mind about it.
This is what we mean when we use such terms like: ‘It is as 
it is.’ If you ask someone who is swimming in water, ‘What 
is water like?’, then they simply bring attention to it and say, 
‘Well, it feels like this. It’s this way.’ Then you ask, ‘How 
is it exactly? Is it wet or cold or warm or hot ...?’ All of these 
words can describe it. Water can be cold, warm, hot, pleasant, 
unpleasant ... But it’s just like this. The sensory realm we’re 
swimming in for a lifetime is this way! It feels like this! You feel 
it! Sometimes it’s pleasant. Sometimes it’s unpleasant. Most 
of the time it’s neither pleasant nor unpleasant. But always 
it’s just this way. Things come and go and change, and there’s 
nothing that you can depend on as being totally stable. The 
sensory realm is all energy and change and movement; all flux
and flow. Sensory consciousness is this way.
Now we’re not judging it; we’re not saying it’s good or it’s bad, 
or you should like it, or you shouldn’t; we’re just bringing 
attention to it – like the water. The sensory realm is a realm 
of feeling. We are born into it and we feel it. From the time the 
umbilical cord is severed we’re physically independent beings; 
we’re no longer physically tied to anybody else. We feel hunger; 
we feel pleasure; we feel pain, heat, and cold. As we grow, we 
feel all kinds of things. We feel with the eyes, the ears, the nose, 
the tongue, the body; and, through thinking and remembering, 
the mind can also generate feeling.

THE W AY IT IS

All this feeling can be lots of fun and wonderful, but it can also 
be depressing, mean and miserable; or it can be neutral – neither 
pleasant nor painful. So all sensory impingement is ‘the way it 
is’. Pleasure is this way; pain is this way. The feeling of neither 
pleasure nor pain is this way. To be able to truly reflect on these 
things, you have to be alert and attentive. Some people think 
that it is up to me to tell them how it is: ‘ Ajahn Sumedho, how 
should I be feeling right now?’ But we’re not telling anybody 
how it is; we’re being open and receptive to how it is. There’s 
no need to tell someone how it is when they can find out for 
themselves. So this two months of finding out how it is, is a 
valuable opportunity. Many human beings, it seems, are not 
even aware that such a development of wisdom is possible.
What do we mean when we use this word ‘wisdom’? From birth 
to death, this is the way it is. There’s always going to be a certain 
amount of pain, and discomfort, unpleasantness and ugliness. 
And if we’re not aware of it as it really is – see it as Dhamma – 
then we tend to create a problem out of it. The span between 
birth and death becomes all very personal; it becomes fraught 
with all kinds of fears and desires and complications.
We suffer a lot in our society from loneliness. So much of our 
life is an attempt to not be lonely: ‘Let’s talk to each other; let’s 
do things together so we won’t be lonely.’ And yet, inevitably, 
we are really alone in these human forms. We can pretend; we 
can entertain each other; but that’s about the best we can do. 
When it comes to the actual experience of life, we’re very much 
alone; and to expect anyone else to take away our loneliness is 
asking too much.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

When there’s physical birth, notice how it makes us seem 
separate. We’re not physically joined to each other, are we? 
With attachment to this body we feel separate and vulnerable; 
we dread being left alone and we create a world of our own that 
we can live in. We have all kinds of interesting companions: 
imaginary friends, physical friends, enemies, but the whole 
lot of it comes and goes, begins and ends. Everything is born 
and dies in our own minds. So we reflect that birth conditions 
death. Birth and death; beginning and ending.
During this retreat, this kind of reflection is highly encouraged: 
contemplate what birth is. Right now we can say: ‘This is the 
result of being born; this body. It’s like this: it’s conscious and 
it feels, there’s intelligence, there’s memory, there’s emotion.’ 
All these can be contemplated because they are mind objects; 
they are dhammas. If we attach to the body as a subject, or to 
opinions and views and feelings as ‘me’ and ‘mine’, then we feel 
loneliness and despair; there’s always going to be the threat of 
separation and ending. Attachment to mortality brings fear 
and desire into our lives. We can feel anxious and worried even 
when life is quite all right. So long as there’s ignorance – avijjā 
– regarding the true nature of things, fear is always going to 
dominate consciousness.
But anxiety is not ultimately true. It’s something we create. 
Worry is just that much. Love and joy and all the best in life, if 
we are attached to them, are going to bring the opposite along 
also. That’s why in meditation we practise accepting the feeling 
of these things. When we accept things for what they are, we’re 
no longer attached to them. They just are what they are; they 
arise and cease, they’re not a self.

THE W AY IT IS

Now from the perspective of our cultural background, how 
does it appear? Our society tends to reinforce the view that 
everything is ‘me’ and ‘mine’. ‘This body is me; I look like this; I 
am a man; I am an American; I am 54 years old; I am an abbot.’ 
But these are just conventions, aren’t they? We’re not saying 
I’m not these things; rather we’re observing how we tend to 
complicate them by believing in the ‘I am’. If we attach to them, 
life becomes so much more than it actually is; it becomes like 
a sticky web. It gets so complicated; whatever we touch sticks 
to us. And the longer we live the more complicated we make 
it. So much fear and desire comes from that commitment to ‘I 
am’ – to being somebody. Eventually they take us to anxiety 
and despair; life seems much more difficult and painful than 
it really is.
But when we just observe life for what it is, then it’s all right: 
the delights, the beauty, the pleasures, are just that. The pain, 
the discomfort, the sickness, are what they are. We can always 
cope with the way life moves and changes. The mind of an 
enlightened human being is flexible and adaptable. The mind 
of the ignorant person is conditioned and fixed.
Whatever we fix on is going to be miserable. Being a man, or 
being a woman, as a permanent belief, is always going to make 
life difficult. Any class we identify with – middle class, working 
class, American, British, Buddhist, Theravada Buddhist – 
grasping to any of these will produce some kind of complication, 
frustration and despair.
Yet conventionally, one can be all these things – a man, 
an American, a Buddhist, a Theravadin; these are merely 
perceptions of mind. They are adequate for communication;

AJAHN SUMEDHO

but they’re nothing more than that. They’re what is called 
sammuttidhamma – ‘conventional reality’. When I say: ‘I’m 
Ajahn Sumedho,’ that’s not a self, not a person; it’s a convention. 
Being a Buddhist monk is not a person – it’s a convention; being 
a man is not a person, it’s a convention. Conventions are as they 
are. When we attach to them out of ignorance, we become 
bound and limited. That’s the sticky web! We’re blinded; being 
deluded by the convention.
When we let go of the conventions, we don’t throw them away. 
I don’t have to kill myself or disrobe; the conventions are all 
right. There’s no suffering involved in any of these if there is 
the awakened mind seeing them for what they are; they just 
are as they are. They’re merely a convenience; expedient to
time and place.
With the realization of ultimate reality ( paramatthadhamma), 
there is the freedom of nibbāna. We are free from the delusions of 
desire and fear; this freedom from conventions is the Deathless. 
But to realize this we have to really look at what attachment is. 
What is it all about? What is suffering, and attachment to the 
‘I am’ process? What is it? We’re not asking anybody to deny 
themselves; attachment to the view of being nobody is still 
somebody. It’s not a matter of affirmation or negation but of 
realization; of seeing. T o do this we use mindfulness.
With mindfulness we can open to the totality. In the beginning 
of this retreat, we open to the whole two months. On the first 
day, we’ve already accepted in full awareness all possibilities: 
sickness and health, success and failure, happiness and 
suffering, enlightenment or total despair. We’re not thinking: 
‘I’m only going to get ... I only want to have ... I want to have

THE W AY IT IS

only the nice things happen to me. And I’ve got to protect 
myself so that I’ll have an idyllic retreat; be perfectly safe and 
tranquillized for two months.’ That in itself is a miserable state, 
isn’t it? Instead, we take all the possibilities, from the best to 
the worst. And we’re doing this consciously. That means: 
everything that happens during these two months is part of 
the retreat – it’s a part of our practice. The Way Things Are is 
Dha m ma for u s: happi ness a nd su ffer i ng , en l ighten ment or tot a l
despair – everything!
If we practise this way, then despair and anguish take us to calm 
and peace. When I was in Thailand I had a lot of these negative 
states – loneliness, boredom, anxiety, doubt, worry and despair. 
But accepted as they are, they cease. And what’s left when 
there’s no more despair? The Dhamma that we’re looking at 
now is subtle. Not subtle in the sense that it’s high up – it’s so 
ordinary, so very much here and now that we don’t notice it. 
Just like the water for the fish. Water is so much a part of its 
life the fish doesn’t notice it; even though it’s swimming in it. 
Sensory consciousness is here, now. It’s this way. It’s not distant. 
It’s not really difficult. It’s just a matter of paying attention to it. 
The way out of suffering is the way of mindfulness: mindfulawareness or wisdom.
So we keep bringing our attention to the way things are. If 
you have nasty thoughts, or feel resentful, bitter or irritated, 
then notice what it feels like in your heart. If we’re frustrated 
and angry during this time, it’s all right because we’ve already 
allowed for that to happen. It’s a part of the practice; it’s the 
way things are. Remember, we’re not trying to become angels 
and saints – we’re not trying to get rid of all our impurities and 
coarseness and just be happy. The human realm is like this! It

AJAHN SUMEDHO

can be very coarse and it can be pure. Pure and impure are a 
pair. T o know purity and impurity is mindfulness-wisdom. T o 
know that impurity is impermanent and not-self is wisdom. 
But the minute we make it personal – ‘Oh, I shouldn’t have 
impure thoughts!’ – we’re stuck again in the realm of despair. 
The more we try to have only pure thoughts, the more the 
impure thoughts keep coming. That way we make sure we’re 
going to be miserable for the whole two months; guarantee 
it. Out of ignorance we create a realm for ourselves that
can only be miserable.
So in mindfulness, or full-mindedness, all misery and all 
happiness are of equal value: no preferences. Happiness is this 
way. Misery is this way. They arise and they cease. Happiness 
is still happiness; it’s not misery. And misery is still misery; 
it’s not happiness. But it is what it is. And it’s nobody’s and 
it’s only that much. And we don’t suffer from it. We accept 
it, we know it and we understand it. All that arises ceases.
All dhammas are not-self.

THE W AY IT IS

3   |   INVESTIGATING  
 THE MIND
The root of suffering is what we call avijjā – not knowing 
or ignorance of the way things really are. This is the basic 
ignorance of not understanding our true nature. We suffer 
because of views and opinions, habits and conditions 
which we do not understand. We live our lives in a state of 
ignorance, not understanding the way things are. If you 
listen to yourself very much, you can sometimes hear such 
statements as, ‘I should do this but I shouldn’t do that’, ‘I 
should be this way, I shouldn’t be that way’; or that the world 
should be other than it is, or our parents should be this way 
or that way, and shouldn’t be the way they are. We have this 
word ‘should’ ringing through our minds because we have 
an idea of what shouldn’t be or should be. In meditation, 
listen to that opinion within yourself of what should be
and what shouldn’t be; just listen to it.
We have a tendency to try to become something, and so we set 
a goal, create an ideal of what we would like to become. Maybe 
we think society should be other than it is. People should 
be kind, generous, understanding, loving; there should be 
brotherhood and people shouldn’t be selfish. The government

AJAHN SUMEDHO

should have wise leaders, the world should be at peace and so 
forth. But the world is as it is at this moment in time, and things 
are as they are. When we don’t understand this we will struggle. 
So listen inwardly to yourselves, to the constant crying, ‘I am 
this way, I am not this way,’ and penetrate this ‘I am, I am not’ 
with awareness.
We tend just to react and take it for granted that ‘I am’ and 
‘I am not’ are the truth. We create ourselves as a personality 
and attach to our memories. We remember the things we 
learnt, we remember what we’ve done – generally the more 
extreme things, we tend to forget more ordinary things. So 
if we do unkind, cruel, foolish things, we have unpleasant 
memories in our lives and feel ashamed or guilty. If we do 
good things, charitable things, kind things, we have good
memories in our lives.
When you start reflecting on this you will be more careful 
about what you do and you say, because if you have lived your 
life foolishly – acting on impulse out of desire for immediate 
gratification or an intention to hurt or cause disharmony or 
exploit others – you are going to be faced with a mind filled 
with very unpleasant memories. People who have led very selfish 
lives often have to drink a lot, take drugs or keep themselves 
constantly occupied, so they don’t have to look at the memories 
that come up in the mind.
In the awakening process of meditation we are bringing 
awareness to the conditions of the mind here and now, just 
by being aware of this sense of ‘I am, I am not.’ Contemplate 
the feelings of pain or pleasure, the memories, thoughts 
and opinions, as impermanent, anicca . The characteristic of

THE W AY IT IS

transience is common to all conditions. How many of you 
have really investigated this in every possible way while sitting, 
standing or lying down? Investigate what you see with your eye, 
hear with your ear, taste with your tongue, smell with your nose, 
feel and experience with your body, think with your mind.
The thought ‘I am’ is an impermanent condition. The thought 
‘I am not’ is an impermanent condition. Thoughts, memories, 
consciousness of thinking, the body itself, our emotions – 
all conditions change. So, in the practice of meditation, you 
must be quite serious, brave and courageous. You must really 
investigate, dare to look at even the most unpleasant conditions 
in life, rather than try to escape, to seek tranquillity or forget 
about everything. In fact, in vipassanā meditation the practice is 
one of looking into suffering; it’s a confrontation with ourselves, 
with what we think of ourselves, with our memories, and our 
emotions, pleasant, unpleasant or indifferent. In other words, 
when these things arise and we are aware of suffering, we take 
the opportunity to examine it rather than rejecting, repressing 
or ignoring it. So suffering is our teacher. It’s teaching us, so we 
have to learn the lesson by studying suffering itself.
It always amazes me that some people think they never suffer. 
They think, ‘I don’t suffer. I don’t know why Buddhists talk 
about suffering all the time. I feel wonderful, full of beauty and 
joy. I’m so happy all the time. I find life a fantastic experience, 
interesting, fascinating and never-ending delight.’ These people 
tend just to accept that side of life and reject the other side, 
because inevitably what delights us disappears and then we are 
sorry. In this way, our desire to be in a constant state of delight 
leads us into all kinds of problems and difficulties.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Suffering is not just caused by massive things like having 
terminal cancer or losing someone you love; it can occur 
around what is very ordinary, like the four postures of sitting, 
standing, walking and lying down. There is nothing extreme 
in them. We contemplate the normal breath and ordinary 
consciousness. We contemplate ordinary feelings, memories 
and thoughts, rather than grasping hold of fantastic ideas and 
thoughts to understand the extremes of existence. So we don’t 
become involved in speculation about the ultimate purpose 
of life, God, the devil, heaven and hell, what happens when 
we die, or reincarnation. In Buddhist meditation we just 
observe the here and now. The birth and death that are going 
on here and now are the beginning and ending of the most
ordinary things.
Contemplate beginning. When you think of birth you think, ‘I 
was born’, but that is the great birth of the body which we can’t 
remember. We experience the ordinary birth of ‘me’ in daily 
life as, ‘I want, I don’t want, I like, I don’t like.’ That’s a birth 
through seeking happiness. We contemplate the ordinary hell 
of our own anger that arises: the heat of the body, the aversion, 
the hatred we feel in the mind. We contemplate the ordinary 
heaven we experience: the happy states, the bliss, the lightness, 
the beauty in the here and now. Or we contemplate the dull 
state of mind, that kind of limbo, neither happy nor unhappy, 
but dull, bored and indifferent. In Buddhist meditation we 
watch these within ourselves. We contemplate our desire for 
power and control, to be in control of someone else, to become 
famous or someone on top.
How many of you, when you find out someone is more gifted 
than you are, want to put them down? This is jealousy. What

THE W AY IT IS

we have to do in our meditation practice is see the ordinary 
jealousies, the hatred we might feel for someone who might take 
advantage of us or annoys us, or the greed or lust we might feel 
for someone who attracts us.
Our mind is like a mirror which reflects the universe, and 
we watch the reflection. We used to take these reflections for 
reality, so that we became entranced, repelled or indifferent 
to them. But in vipassanā we observe that they are all just 
changing conditions. We begin to see them as objects rather 
than as a self, whereas when we’re ignorant, we tend to seek
identity with them.
So in practice we are looking at the universe as it is being reflected 
in our minds. It does not matter what anyone else happens to 
experience. One meditator will sit and experience all sorts of 
brilliant lights, colours, fascinating images, Buddhas, celestial 
beings, even smell wonderful odours and hear divine sounds, 
and think, ‘What a wonderful meditation, such brilliance 
came, a divine being like a radiant angel came and touched me 
and I felt this ecstasy. The most wonderful ecstatic experience 
of my whole life – I’ve waited my whole life for this experience.’ 
Meanwhile someone else is thinking, ‘Why doesn’t something 
like that ever happen to me? I sat for a whole hour in pain with 
an aching back, depressed, wanting to run away, wondering 
why on earth I’d come to this retreat anyway.’ Another person 
might say, ‘I can’t stand all those people who have those silly 
ideas and fantasies. They disgust me, they develop this terrible 
hatred and aversion in me. I hate the Buddha-image sitting in the 
window, I want to smash it. I hate Buddhism and meditation!’

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Which of these three people is the good meditator? The one 
who sees devas dancing in heaven, the one who is bored, 
indifferent and dull, or the one full of hatred and aversion? 
Devas and angels dancing in the celestial realms are anicca , 
are impermanent. Boredom is anicca , impermanent. Hatred 
and aversion are anicca , impermanent. So the good meditator, 
the one who is practising in the right way, is the one looking 
at the impermanent nature of these conditions. When you talk 
to someone who sees devas and experiences bright lights, you 
start doubting your own practice and think, ‘But maybe I’m 
not capable of enlightenment. Maybe I’m not meditating right.’ 
Doubt itself is impermanent. Whatever arises passes away. So 
the good meditator is the one who sees the impermanent nature 
of bliss and ecstasy, or experiences dullness, anger, hatred and 
aversion, and reflects on the impermanent nature of those 
qualities when sitting, walking or lying down.
What is your tendency? Are you very positive about everything 
– ‘I like everybody here. I believe in the teachings of the 
Buddha, I believe in the Dhamma’? That’s a faith kind of mind. 
It believes, and that kind of mind can create and experience 
blissful things very quickly. Some of the farmers in Thailand, 
people who have hardly any worldly knowledge, and who can 
hardly read and write, can sometimes experience blissful states, 
experience lights and see devas , and believe in them. When 
you believe in devas , you see them. If you believe in lights and 
celestial realms, you’ll see them. If you believe the Buddha is 
going to save you, he will come and save you. What you believe 
in happens to you. If you believe in ghosts, fairies, elves, if 
you don’t doubt those things, you’ll find them appearing to 
you. But they are still anicca , impermanent and not-self. But

THE W AY IT IS

most people don’t believe in fairies and devas and think such 
things are silly. This is the negative kind of mind, the one that’s 
suspicious and doubtful, does not believe in anything: ‘I don’t 
believe in fairies and devas. I don’t believe in any of that kind of 
thing. Ridiculous! Show me a fairy.’ The very suspicious and
sceptical mind never sees such things.
There is faith, there is doubt. In Buddhist practice we examine 
the belief and doubt we experience in our mind, and we see that 
they are conditions changing. I have contemplated doubt itself 
as a sign. I’d ask myself a question like, ‘Who am I?’ and then 
I’d listen for the answer – something like ‘Sumedho Bhikkhu.’ 
Then I’d think, ‘That’s not the answer, who are you really?’ 
I’d see the struggle, the habitual reaction of trying to find an 
answer to the question. But I would not accept any conceptual 
answer: ‘Who is sitting here? What is this? What’s this here? 
Who is thinking anyway? What is it that thinks?’ When a state 
of uncertainty or doubt arose, I would just look at that state as 
a sign, because that is where the mind stops and goes blank, and 
then emptiness arises.
I found asking myself unanswerable questions which would 
cause doubt to arise, a useful way of emptying the mind. 
Doubt is an impermanent condition. Form, the known, is 
impermanent; not knowing is impermanent. Some days I would 
go out and look at Nature, observe myself just standing there, 
looking at the ground. I’d ask myself, ‘Is the ground separate 
from myself? What is that, who is that who sees the ground? Is 
that ground with those leaves, are those leaves in my mind or 
outside my mind? What is it that sees, is it the eyeball? If I took 
my eyeball out, would it be separated from myself, taken out of 
the socket, would I still see those leaves? Or is that ground there

AJAHN SUMEDHO

when I’m not looking at it? Who is the one who’s conscious of 
this anyway?’ And sound – I did some experiments with sound 
because the objects of sight have a certain solidity – they seem 
fairly permanent, for today at least. But sound is truly anicca – 
try to get hold of it and hold it. I’d investigate my senses in this 
way – can my eyes hear sound? If I cut off my ears and burst 
my eardrums, will there be any sound? Can I see and hear in 
exactly the same moment?
All sense organs and their objects are impermanent, changing 
conditions. Think right now, ‘Where is your mother?’ Where is 
my mother right now? If I think of her in her flat in California, 
it’s a concept in the mind. Even if I think, ‘California is over 
there’, that’s still the mind thinking, ‘over there.’ ‘Mother’ is a 
concept: so where is the mother right now? She is in the mind: 
when the word ‘mother’ comes up, you hear the word as a sound 
and it brings up a mental image, a memory or a feeling of like 
or dislike or indifference. All concepts in the mind which we 
take for reality are to be investigated, so know what concepts do 
to the mind. Notice the pleasure you get from thinking about 
certain concepts and the displeasure that other concepts bring.
You may have prejudices, biases, about race, nationality – these 
are all concepts or conceptual proliferations. Men have certain 
attitudes and biases about women, and women have certain 
attitudes and biases about men; this is just inherent in those 
identities. But in meditation, ‘female’ and ‘male’ are concepts 
and feelings – perception in the mind. So, in this practice of 
vipassanā, you penetrate with insight into the nature of all 
conditions, coarse or refined. Insight breaks down the illusions 
that these concepts give us, the illusions that they are real.

THE W AY IT IS

When we talk like this, people might question, ‘How do you live 
in this society, if it’s all unreal?’ The Buddha made a very clear 
distinction between conventional reality and ultimate reality. 
On the conventional level of existence you use conventions that 
bring harmony to yourself and the society you live in. What 
kind of conventions bring harmony? Things like being good, 
being mindful, not doing things that cause disharmony such 
as stealing, cheating others, exploiting others. Having respect 
for other beings, having compassion, being observant, trying 
to help: all these conventions bring harmony. In the Buddhist 
teaching on the conventional level, we live in a way that means 
doing good and refraining from doing evil with the body or 
speech. So it’s not as if we are rejecting the conventional world: 
‘I want nothing to do with it because it’s an illusion.’ But that 
thought’s just another illusion!
In our practice then, we see that thought is thought. ‘The world 
is an illusion’ is a thought; ‘The world is not an illusion’ is a 
thought. But here and now, be aware that all we are conscious 
of is changing. Live mindfully, put effort and concentration 
into what you do, whether you’re sitting, walking, lying down 
or working. Whether you’re a man or a woman, a secretary, a 
housewife or a labourer or an executive or whatever – apply 
effort and concentration. Do good and refrain from doing evil. 
This is how a Buddhist lives within the conventional forms 
of society. But they are no longer deluded by the body or the 
society, or by the things that go on in the society, because a 
Buddhist is one who investigates the universe by investigating 
their own body and mind.

AJAHN SUMEDHO 29
PRECEPTS  |   4
T onight is the new moon, 1 and so today we reaffirmed our 
commitment to sīla : the Pāṭimokkha for the bhikkhus, 
the Ten Precepts for the nuns, the Eight Precepts for the 
anagārikas. In this reaffirming of our commitment we can 
take these Eight Precepts to a refined level of interpretation. 
So with the first precept: pāṇātipātā veramaṇī – to refrain 
from killing other creatures – even though none of us may be 
prone to murder or physical violence, it is important to make 
it clear in our mind that our intention in this life is not even to
harm others deliberately.
The second precept – adinnādānā veramaṇī – is not just to 
refrain from stealing, but to respect the property of others; not 
to disturb or misuse that which belongs to others. It is a way of 
making that very definite in our consciousness.
Abrahmacariyā veramaṇī, the third precept, is the vow of 
celibacy. At this time there’s much concern about AIDS and 
venereal diseases. A total misuse of sexuality has developed over 
the past few decades, whereby people have been completely 
irresponsible and sought pleasure from sexual activities 
1. In Buddhist cultures, the phases of the moon are celebrated as the lunar 
‘Observance Days.’ These are days when Buddhists come to the monastery, commit 
to moral precepts, listen to Dhamma talks and practise meditation. On these days, 
the bhikkhus participate in the fortnightly recitation of the Pāṭimokkha – the 
core of the Monastic Rule. Anagāikas are people who are undertaking  monastic 
training at a preliiminary stage.

THE W AY IT IS

without regard for the consequences. The result is that now we 
have moral dilemmas about abortion, and about the various 
diseases and problems which arise and how to solve them. What 
should we do? Try to promote the use of condoms and all kinds 
of prophylactic measures, so that people can do everything 
they want without having to restrain themselves? Or promote 
pills and devices to prevent pregnancy, so that no one will 
have to choose between having an abortion or having a baby? 
What is never even mentioned in all this is any kind of moral 
position. It seems to be something you just don’t mention.
Celibacy is never even considered as a possible way of life.
But when we really consider our life as human beings, there’s a 
more skilful way to live. We can take on responsibility for our 
existence and refrain from involving others, or even exploiting 
our own bodies for the pursuit of that kind of pleasure. T o 
undertake celibacy is a rather ennobling precept. It lifts us up: to 
be celibate is a potential, a possibility for developing meditation 
through the restraint necessary for the realization of truth.
Celibacy is something one has to take on for oneself. It’s not 
something which can be forced; that would not be chastity 
anymore, it would be tyranny. It has to be something we 
choose, something we rise up to as individual beings, not an 
imposition on us. We don’t want to go back to a puritanical 
position of ‘Thou shalt not’, and threaten people with 84,000 
aeons in fiery hells, burning in absolute pain, for any kind of 
sexual enjoyment. We are not trying to bring fear into the mind 
or to intimidate, but rather to encourage what is noble and 
beautiful in our humanity.
I assume that you are capable of motivating yourselves, and 
so I present this opportu nity for practice. Sometimes people

AJAHN SUMEDHO

can have very low opinions of themselves which are not really 
true. Maybe they’ve never had an opportunity to motivate 
themselves, or never felt that anyone trusted them enough to 
do so. We are trying to bring that kind of value, that kind of 
beauty into our monastic life, so that monasticism is something 
that is ‘beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle 
and beautiful in the end’, and not a kind of imposed tyranny 
or a forced march. We need to take on that responsibility 
for ourselves, rather than turning it over to somebody else, 
expecting someone else to come along and enlighten us or love 
us, drive us or scold us.
The spiritual potential of each being here is to be recognized. 
We have that marvellous ability to rise up to things, rather than 
to sink down. Rising up isn’t a wilful force, it’s the ability to go 
beyond the inertia or the habit tendencies of one’s life towards 
something higher; learning how just to pay attention to the 
breath, or to be more patient, more forgiving, more kindly 
to oneself and others. All of this is the effort of rising up and 
meeting the occasion. This doesn’t mean always having to 
succeed or prove oneself, it means rising up to meet a situation 
in a skilful way with mindfulness and wisdom. And this is a 
possibility for us: we don’t have to be caught in the force of 
habit and lost in the realm of delusion.
With speech, musāvādā veramaṇī , the precept is to refrain 
from incorrect speech: how easy it is to get caught in self-view 
if we use ‘I am’, ‘poor me’ speech habits. Notice the way the 
Buddha used language: ‘There is suffering’, ‘there is’ anger, 
greed or delusion. This is an example of refraining from wrong 
speech. If we start reflecting in that way, it affects how we see 
things. In this community we have a willingness to learn how

THE W AY IT IS

to communicate, and try to have a way of speaking which is 
clear and honest, but not demanding or deluding in any way. By 
contrast, in society one tries to be clever in one’s speech, witty, 
droll – and, with an intelligent mind, one’s speech habits can 
be quite cruel and unskilful. But we give that up and try to use 
speech as something beautiful and clear, without giving forth 
wrong views to others.
Musāvādā veramaṇī is not just refraining from lies, but 
involves the intention to take on responsibility for speech. That 
whole function of our humanity is quite a miracle when you 
contemplate it, and yet we just take it for granted. We can use our 
speech for telling dirty jokes, cursing and swearing, gossiping, 
insulting and all kinds of mean, horrible and dishonest things. 
Or we can respect this rather marvellous gift we have and learn 
how to use it in a way that is beautiful, accurate and kindly.
Then surāmerayamajja-pamādaṭṭhānā veramaṇī, refraining 
from intoxicants: think how fortunate we are that we don’t 
have to drink, take drugs and shoot up heroin. That problem 
affects all levels of society. Men, women and children, all races, 
all classes, are being caught in the grip of these addictive drugs. 
There are also cigarettes and alcohol, all harmful and deluding 
to the human mind. When we become clouded with drugs and 
drink, we can’t be responsible for what we say?
I remember that when I used to drink, it was so that I didn’t have 
to be responsible for what I said. When intoxicated, you lose 
your sense of timidity and shame with regard to sexual conduct. 
You have a few drinks, and suddenly a lot of inhibitions just 
drop away. I wasn’t into murdering people, but I certainly had 
no hesitation about getting rid of annoying insects and other

AJAHN SUMEDHO

things that I didn’t like. One could see how easily one’s sense 
of moral propriety and commitment could disappear under 
drugs and drink. Nowadays you find young people prostituting 
themselves to get money to buy drink and drugs – even people 
twelve or thirteen years old, those we used to call ‘children’.
Then there are the renunciant precepts, those which simplify 
our lives. T o refrain from eating after noon, and from 
entertainment and self-adornment. For human beings there 
is a whole realm of fun and entertainment available through 
eating, dancing, singing, games, movies, TV and shows. Then 
there’s sleep. There’s the temptation to spend a great deal of 
time seeking comfort and sleep. These aren’t immoral. I’m not 
saying that eating a dinner is an immoral activity – or dancing 
and singing, come to that – but we are trying to restrain 
ourselves and refrain from opportunities to distract ourselves 
through sensory pleasures, so that we can observe and reflect.
These are standards and precepts for reflection, and not rules 
from God. They are not to be viewed from the ‘Thou shalt not’ 
position. Each one of the precepts is a resolution, something we 
are taking on and not something God is imposing on us. So 
you rise up to these precepts and make a resolution, in order 
to have it in your minds when you are tempted to act on the 
impulses you might be experiencing. After all, most of us come 
from backgrounds which were quite indulgent, and where we 
were never really encouraged to restrain ourselves. Sīla is an 
honourable and lovely opportunity we have as human beings. 
We choose to be moral. We’re not being moral because we’re 
afraid of being immoral. We choose to do this and rise up to 
that which is noble, good, kind and generous.

THE W AY IT IS

Admittedly, the attractions of the mainstream are strong, 
and it isn’t part of my teaching to condemn them. I’m not 
against the worldly life, nor am I trying to raise monasticism 
up as something everyone should be doing. One can live a 
very good, wholesome lay life too – wholesomeness is not 
just the prerogative of monks and nuns. Sometimes laypeople 
think I’m a ‘monk fanatic’ because I emphasize the value of 
this way of living. But the attitude is one of reflection rather 
than having an axe to grind or a position to take on anything. 
We aim to develop that reflective ability of the mind, and the 
particular conventions we find ourselves in are developed
around that. This is what the Buddha’s teaching is about.
All the conventions of the Vinaya (monastic discipline) and 
Dhamma teachings are designed to help in that way. Some 
people say you can follow the teachings fully as a layperson, 
and this is not to be denied; but if monastics can’t use the 
lifestyle which is deliberately established for Dhamma-Vinaya, 
what makes them think they’ll ever do it in any other form? 
This is what I want to get you to look at. Look at yourselves as 
wanting something you don’t have, or wanting to get away from 
what you have. Just watch that in yourself, that restlessness, 
discontent and movement of your mind.
Sometimes, of course, one doesn’t want to give up the world yet, 
one still wants rebirth and happiness and worldly things. Fair 
enough. But I don’t want you to go round lying to yourselves. 
If you want to have your own way, have rebirths and worldly 
happiness, that’s your decision – but don’t delude yourselves 
by thinking that you are doing something else, because if you 
really understand the teaching of the Buddha, there’s nowhere 
to go and nothing to do. This is the way it is. We are living a life

AJAHN SUMEDHO

that is for that kind of reflection. Then you can observe that 
desire to be somewhere else as a movement of your mind, to 
see that and recognize it for what it is. Whether you follow that 
desire or not is still up to you.
Allow yourself to die to the moment. Investigate and observe 
how things are. Everything that arises ceases. In all, everything 
fits into that pattern. In this way we can reflect on the mundane 
day-to-day ordinariness of our lives. Since we monastics can’t 
dance and sing, go to shows, pubs, football games or restaurants 
and follow the pleasures and distractions of the world, the 
ordinariness of our lives takes on more significance. If you’re 
used to a high level of excitement, ordinary things are boring 
and one is always aiming at some new thrill or experience.
Monasticism is a boring lifestyle, just a routine. We’re not 
aiming at having exciting things to do or distractions, because 
in meditation we are being aware of how things ordinarily are 
in consciousness. So we no longer try to find and follow the 
extraordinary – because it’s only through calming down and 
through restraint, not following restlessness and not being 
caught up in emotions, that we have a chance to realize the 
Unconditioned. It’s only when we can let go, calm down and 
reflect that there is a realization of the ending of the conditioned 
realm – in which everything that arises ceases – and a realization 
of nibbāna. There is no way of realizing nibbāna by striving and 
trying to attain, achieve and be caught up in the arising side. 
You have to let go of that.
The realization of letting go of what arises in the mind leads to 
witnessing the cessation of that which has arisen. Then there is 
the true peace of allowing things to be as they are. No longer

THE W AY IT IS

are we somebody who has to get somewhere, do something, 
get rid of something or change something. When we’re caught 
in distracting ourselves with pleasures, we’re somebody, and 
somebody who has to find happiness, have success or become 
something. No matter how many excitements and pleasures I 
might experience, I have to have more than that. We are never 
content with the excitement and adventures of life. They just 
cause us to be caught up in that movement of having to have 
more and more – until we get burnt out. Then we go to the opposite extreme, where because we are tired and worn out from 
all the excitement and stimulation, we break down, fall asleep 
or get drugged or drunk. We want not to exist. We can only 
have so much excitement and then we can’t bear it any more.
T o be excited continuously is a hell realm. In my sister’s home in 
California they have all these television stations and cable relays. 
You can have seventy or so channels at your disposal all the time. 
People get into the habit of just switching channels if anything 
becomes the slightest bit boring, or slightly uninteresting or 
unpleasant. They just switch to the next one – there’s always 
a gun fight or a chorus line to zap you. It’s a kind of hell realm 
– it’s unpleasant to have a mind that has to be stimulated one 
moment after another.
So you see the loveliness of a life that is based on composure, 
moral restraint, nobility, generosity, kindness, and reflection on 
Dhamma. It is wonderful to be able to have the opportunity 
and the encouragement to contemplate your own existence, 
and train in a way that enables you to respect yourself. You can 
move towards being a contented and joyful being rather than a 
hungry, obsessed one.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

EVERYTHING THAT ARISES  |   5  
 PA SSE S AWAY
The Buddha said the origin of all suffering was ignorance, so 
it’s important to consider what he really meant by ‘ignorance’. 
Most human beings in the world live very much as if their 
habits, thoughts, feelings and memories are what they really 
are. They do not take the time to look at their lives, or don’t 
really have the opportunity to watch and consider how these 
conditions operate.
What is a condition? The body that we have, emotions 
and feelings, the perceptions of the mind, conceptions and 
consciousness through the senses – these are conditions. A 
condition is something that is added, compounded, something 
that arises and passes away; it’s not the Uncreated, Unborn, 
Unoriginated ultimate reality. Religion is what human beings 
use to try to get back to that ultimate realization of reality beyond 
the cycles of birth and death, the supramundane wisdom or 
lokuttara paññā. Nirvana or nibbāna is the experience of this 
transcendent reality. This is when we suddenly know the truth; 
not by studying the Pali scriptures or a Zen book, but through 
direct experience.
We generally conceive the truth as being a thing, nibbāna  as 
being some peaceful state of mind or some kind of ecstatic

THE W AY IT IS

experience. All of us have experienced some kind of happiness, 
so we like to conceive the Unborn, Uncreated, Unoriginated as 
a happy experience. But the Buddha was very careful never to 
describe the Ultimate Reality or nibbāna  – he never said very 
much about it. People want to know what it is, write books on it, 
speculate about its nature, but this is exactly what the Buddha 
didn’t do. Instead he pointed to direct knowing of conditions 
that change, what we can know through our own experience at 
this moment. This is not a matter of believing anyone else. It’s a 
matter of knowing at this present moment that whatever arises 
passes away. So we put forth that kind of attention in our lives 
– we are attentive and notice that whatever arises passes away. 
Every condition of your mind or body, whether it is a sensation 
of pleasure or pain, feeling or memory, sight, sound, smell, taste 
or touch, inside or outside, is just a condition.
It’s important to reflect on what ‘ignorance’ really means, in the 
sense in which the Buddha used it when he called it the origin of 
all suffering. Being ignorant means that we identify with these 
conditions by regarding them as ‘me’ or ‘mine’, or as something 
that we don’t want to be ‘me’ or ‘mine’. We have the idea that 
we must find some permanent pleasant condition, we have to 
achieve something, get something we don’t have. But you can 
notice that desire in your mind is a moving thing, looking for 
something, so it’s a changing condition that arises and passes 
away – it’s not-self. The expression ‘not-self ’ ( anattā) is not 
some kind of mantra you keep repeating to get rid of things, 
but an actual penetration of the very nature of all desires.
As you look carefully, very patiently and humbly, you begin to 
see that the created arises out of the Uncreated and goes back 
to the Uncreated; it disappears and there is nothing left. If it

AJAHN SUMEDHO

were really you and really yours, it would stay, wouldn’t it? If it 
were really you, where would it go, to some kind of storehouse 
of personality? But that concept, like whatever you conceive, 
is a condition that arises and passes away. Whenever you try 
to conceive yourself or any concept or memory of yourself as 
this or that, it is only a condition of your mind. It’s not what 
you are – you’re not a condition of your mind. So sorrow, 
despair, love and happiness are all conditions of mind and
they are all not-self.
Notice when you suffer, feel discontent in your life – why? It’s 
because of some attachment, some idea of yourself or someone 
else. Someone you love dies and you feel sorry for yourself, 
or you think of and dwell on the good times you’ve had with 
them, creating more conditions of mind. Maybe you feel guilty 
because you weren’t giving or loving all of the time – that’s a 
condition of mind also. You have a memory, you conceive 
of them as being alive – but that very idea of a person is a 
perception of mind, it’s not a person. Remembering someone 
who is alive, someone you wish you could be with right now, is 
a condition of mind. And remembering someone who’s died, 
so that you’ll never see them again, is also a condition of mind.
Buddhist meditation is a way of looking at the conditions 
of mind, investigating and seeing what they are rather than 
believing in them. People want to believe – when someone close 
to you has died, somebody may tell you, ‘Oh, they went up to 
heaven with God the Father’, or, ‘They’re living in the delights 
of the T usita Heaven.’ They say this so that you’ll have a pleasant 
perception of mind: ‘Well, now I know that my grandmother is 
happy up there in the heavenly realms, dancing with the angels.’ 
Then somebody else says, ‘Well, you know, she did some pretty

THE W AY IT IS

dreadful things, she’s probably down in Hell, burning in the 
eternal fires!’ So you start worrying that maybe you’ll end up 
there too – but that’s a perception of mind. Heaven and hell are 
conditioned phenomena.
If you reflect back to ten years ago, that’s a condition of mind 
that arises and passes away, and it arises because I’ve just 
suggested it to you. So that condition is dependent upon another 
condition; memory is what we have experienced, and the future 
is the unknown. But who is it who knows the conditions of the 
moment? I can’t find that ‘who’: there’s only the knowing, and 
knowing can know anything that is present now – pleasant or 
unpleasant, speculations about the future or reminiscences of 
the past, creations of yourself as this or that. You create yourself 
or the world you live in, so you can’t really blame anyone else.
If you do, it’s because you’re still ignorant: We call the One Who 
Knows ‘Buddha’, but that doesn’t mean ‘Buddha’ is a condition. 
This is not saying that a Buddha-rūpa knows anything, but 
rather that ‘Buddha’ is the knowing. So Buddhist meditation 
is really being aware, rather than becoming Buddha. The idea 
of becoming Buddha is based on conditions – you think you’re 
someone who isn’t Buddha right now, and in order to become 
Buddha you have to read books to find out how to become one.
Of course, this means that you have to work really hard to get rid 
of those qualities which are not Buddha-like. You are far from 
perfect, you can be angry, greedy, doubtful and frightened, 
and of course, Buddhas aren’t like that because Buddha is that 
which knows, so they know better. In order to become Buddha, 
you have to get rid of these un-Buddha-like qualities and try 
to develop Buddha-like qualities such as compassion. But all

AJAHN SUMEDHO

these are creations of the mind. We create ‘Buddhas’ because 
we believe in the creations of the mind. But they aren’t real 
Buddhas. They’re only false Buddhas. They’re not wisdom 
Buddhas, they’re just conditions of our mind.
As long as you conceive yourself as being somebody who has 
to do something in order to become something else, you are 
still caught in a trap, a condition of mind, as being a self, and 
you never quite understand anything properly. No matter how 
many years you meditate, you will never really understand the 
teaching; you will always be just off the mark. The direct way of 
seeing things now – that whatever arises passes away – doesn’t 
mean that you are throwing anything away. It means that you’re 
looking as you’ve never bothered to look before. You’re looking 
from a perspective of what’s here now, rather than looking for 
something that’s not here.
If you come into the meditation hall thinking, ‘I’ve got to spend 
this hour looking for the Buddha, trying to become something, 
trying to get rid of these bad thoughts; I must sit and practise 
hard, try to become what I should become – so I’ll sit here and 
try getting rid of things, try to get things, try to hold onto 
things’ – with that attitude, meditation is a really strenuous 
effort and always a failure.
But if you are just aware of the conditions of mind – if you 
see in perspective the desire to become, to get rid of, to do 
something, or the feeling that you can’t do it, or that you’re 
an expert or whatever – you begin to see that whatever you’re 
experiencing is a changing condition and not ‘self ’. You’re 
seeing a perspective of being Buddha, rather than doing 
something in order to become Buddha. When we talk about

THE W AY IT IS

sati, mindfulness, this is what we mean. I am really shocked 
and amazed by many religious people – Christians, Buddhists 
or whatever – who seem to be ignorant regarding the practice 
of their religion. Few people seem to have any perspective on 
religious doctrine and belief and disbelief. They don’t bother 
to find out. They are still trying to describe the indescribable, 
limit the unlimited, know the unknowable, and not many look 
at the way they are. They believe what somebody else has told 
them. In Theravada Buddhism, monks will tell you that you 
can’t get enlightened these days; there’s no way you can even 
attain stream-entry, the first stage of sainthood, those days are 
past. They believe enlightenment is such a remote possibility 
that they don’t even put forth much effort to see that all that 
arises passes away. So monks can spend lifetimes reading books 
and translating suttas, but believing that they’re unenlightened 
and it’s impossible to become enlightened. But then what’s the 
point of religion anyway? Why bother if the ultimate truth is so 
remote, such an unlikely possibility? In that case we become like 
anthropologists, sociologists or philosophers, just discussing 
comparative religion.
Gotama the Buddha was one whose wisdom came from 
observing Nature, the conditions of mind and body. That’s not 
impossible for any of us to do. We have minds and bodies; all we 
have to do is to watch them. It’s not as if we have to have special 
powers to do that, or that somehow this time is a different time 
from that of Gotama the Buddha. Time is an illusion caused 
by ignorance. People in the time of Gotama the Buddha were 
no different from people now – they had greed, hatred and 
delusion, egos, conceits and fears, just like people nowadays. If 
you start thinking about Buddhist doctrines, different levels of

AJAHN SUMEDHO

attainment, you’ll just get into a state of doubting. You don’t 
have to check yourself with a list in a book, but just know for 
yourself until no condition of body or mind deludes you.
People say to me, ‘I can’t do all that, I’m just an ordinary person, 
a layman; when I think of doing all that, I realize I can’t do it, 
it’s too much for me.’ I say, ‘If you think about it, you can’t do 
it, that’s all. Don’t think about it, just do it.’ Thought only takes 
you to doubt. People who just think about life can’t do anything. 
If it’s worth doing, do it. When you become depressed, learn 
from depression; when you fall sick, learn from sickness; when 
you’re happy, learn from happiness – these are all opportunities 
to learn in the world. Keep silently listening and watching as a 
way of life – then you begin to understand conditions. There’s 
nothing to fear. You don’t have to get anything that you don’t 
have already, there’s nothing to get rid of.

THE W AY IT IS

6  |   THE FIVE KHANDHĀ
As long as these human bodies are alive and their senses are 
operating, we have to be constantly on our guard, alert and 
mindful, because the force of habit of grasping the sensual world 
as a self is so strong. This is very strong conditioning in all of us. 
So the way the Buddha taught is the way of mindfulness and wise 
reflection. Rather than making metaphysical statements about 
True Nature or Ultimate Reality, the Buddha’s teaching points 
to the condition of grasping. That’s the only thing that keeps 
us from enlightenment. Buddha-wisdom is an understanding 
of the way things are through observing oneself, rather than 
observing how the stars and planets operate. We don’t go out 
looking at the trees and contemplating nature as if they were 
an object of our vision, but we actually observe nature as it 
operates through our personal form.
What we take ourselves to be can be classified as five aggregates 
or khandhā: rūpa, form; vedanā , feelings; saññā , perception; 
saṅkhārā, mental formations or thought processes; viññāṇa , 
sense consciousness. They provide a skilful means of seeing all 
sensual phenomena in groups. The easiest to meditate on is the 
rūpa khandha, the form of your own body, because it is stuck 
to the ground, heavy, gross. It’s a slower moving thing than the 
mental phenomena – vedanā, saññā, saṅkhārā or viññāṇa. You

AJAHN SUMEDHO

can reflect on your own body for long periods of time, meditate 
on the breath rather than on consciousness, because it is within 
our ability to concentrate on breathing. Ordinary people can 
contemplate their own breath.
You can contemplate the feeling of your own eyes. They have 
sensations. Contemplate the tongue, the wetness of the mouth 
or your tongue touching the palate in your mouth. You can 
contemplate the body as a sense organ giving you the sensations 
of pleasure and pain, heat and cold. Just observe what the 
feeling of cold or heat in the body is like; you can contemplate 
that because it is not what you are. It’s an object you can see, can 
easily observe as if it were something separate from yourself. If 
you don’t do that, you just tend to react. When you’re too hot 
you try to get cooler and take off your jumper, and then you 
grow cold and put it back on again. You can just react to those 
sensations of pleasure and pain in the body. Pleasure – ‘Oh, 
isn’t that wonderful’, and you try to hold on to it, to have more 
pleasure. And pain – ‘Oh – get rid of that’, and you run away 
from anything uncomfortable or painful. But in meditation 
we can see these sensations, and the body itself is a sensual 
condition that has pleasure, pain, heat and cold.
You can reflect on the forms that you see. Just look at something 
beautiful, like flowers. Flowers are probably the most beautiful 
things on the earth and so we like flowers. So note when you 
look at a flower, how you’re drawn to it and want to keep 
looking at it, being attracted to what is pleasing to the eye. Or 
look at something that is unpleasant to the eye, say excrement. 
When you see excrement, cow dung on the path, you politely 
ignore it. Look at your own excrement. We produce it ourselves 
and yet it’s something that we don’t really want to go round

THE W AY IT IS

showing other people. It’s something we’d rather nobody ever 
saw us producing. You don’t really feel drawn to go looking at it 
like you would a flower, do you? But we’re quite willing to wear 
flowers, carry flowers around, have flowers on our shrine. It’s 
not that you should find excrement attractive. I’m just pointing 
out that you can meditate on this force of the sensory world. It’s 
a natural force. It’s not bad or wrong, but you can meditate on 
it to see how you tend to react to sensory experiences.
When you experience beautiful sounds or horrible ones, 
pleasant odours or stinking ones, pleasant tastes or unpleasant 
ones, pleasurable physical sensations or painful ones, heat and 
cold – meditate on these things. Look and see these things as 
they are: all rūpa is impermanent. Beautiful flowers are only 
beautiful for a while, then they become repulsive. So we observe 
this natural transformation from what is fresh and beautiful to 
what is old, ugly. I was a lot prettier when I was twenty! Now 
I’m old and ugly. An old human body is not very beautiful, but 
it’s the body following what it’s supposed to do. I’m glad mine is 
not getting prettier. It would be embarrassing if it was.
The mental khandhā  also operate on that same principle. 
Vedanā is a mental state, the feeling you have of attraction and 
aversion to the physical things that you hear, see, smell, taste, 
touch. The sensation of pain is just as it is, but then there’s 
the reaction of liking or disliking, or not even that, but just a 
moving towards or away from it. You can be aware of feelings, 
moods. Note the heat that comes from anger, the dullness that 
comes from doubt and sloth and torpor. Note the feeling when 
you’re jealous. You can witness that feeling. Watch instead of 
just trying to annihilate jealousy. When jealousy conditions 
your mind, begin to reflect on it rather than reacting to it or

AJAHN SUMEDHO

trying to get rid of it because you don’t like it. When you’re 
cold, what is coldness? Do you like it? This coldness, feeling 
cold, is that something terribly unpleasant or do you just make 
a lot out of it? Hunger, what is hunger like? When you’re feeling 
hungry, meditate on that physical feeling to which you tend to 
react by trying to get something to eat.
Or meditate on the feeling of being alone or separate, the 
feeling that people look down on you. If you feel I don’t like 
you, meditate on that feeling. (Or if you feel you don’t like me, 
meditate on that!) Bring this into consciousness now, but not 
analytically, trying to figure out whether I really do like you; 
or whether your relationship to me is a dependent, childlike 
relationship that you shouldn’t have; or getting caught up in 
Freudian psychology, or whatever. Just observe the doubting, 
uncertain state of mind in your relationships to others, not to 
analyze, but just to observe the feelings of confidence or lack 
of confidence, aversion or attraction. That is vedanā. This is 
a natural thing. We’re all sensitive beings, so attraction and 
repulsion are operating all the time. They are conditions in 
nature, not a personal problem unless we make it so.
Saññā khandha  is the perception khandha. T o grasp a
perception means to believe in the way things appear in the 
present as if they have a kind of permanent quality. That’s 
how we tend to operate in our lives. So I might think, for 
example, that a particular monk is this way. It’s a perception I 
have whether I’m sitting next to him or I’m alone, whether he’s 
helping me or he’s angry with me. I have this fixed view. A fixed 
perception is not all that conscious, but I tend to operate from 
that particular fixed position if I believe in my perception. And 
when I think of him in that way, it’s as if his personality is fixed

THE W AY IT IS

and constant rather than being the way it is at this time. My 
perception of him is just a perception of the moment; it’s not a 
soul that carries through time, not a fixed personality. So saññā 
is to be meditated on.
Mental formations are khandhā. There are perceptions of the 
mind (saññā), and on the basis of them are our mental activities 
(saṅkhārā). So the assumptions you have about yourself, from 
childhood, parents, teachers, friends, relatives, and whether 
you perceive yourself as good and positive or in a negative 
way or a confused way – all these are the saññā/saṅkhārā 
khandhā. Memories come up, or fears about what you might 
be lacking. You can worry that there might be a serious flaw 
in your character, or that some horrible repressed desires might 
be lurking way down deep in your mind, which might come 
up in meditation and drive you crazy. That is another mental 
condition, not knowing what we are, so that sometimes we 
imagine the worst possible things. But what we can know is 
that whatever we believe ourselves to be is a condition of the 
mind; it arises, it passes away, it’s impermanent.
If we come from certain fixed perceptions of ourselves, we 
conceive all kinds of things. If you operate from the position ‘I 
am a man’ you assume that perception of yourself is what you 
are. So you never investigate that perception; you just believe 
that you’re a man and then conceive manhood as being a certain 
way, what a man should be. Then you compare yourself to what 
the ideal for manhood is, and if you don’t live up to those high 
standards of manhood, you worry. Something is wrong! You 
start feeling upset or guilty, or hating yourself, because of your 
basic assumption that you’re a man. On a conventional level 
this might be true: men are this way and women are that way.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

We’re not denying the conventional reality, but we’re no longer 
attaching to it as a personal quality, a fixed position to take at 
all times in all places. This is a way of freeing ourselves from 
that quality of being bound to unsatisfactory conditions. If 
you believe in being a man or a woman as your true identity 
and your soul, that belief will always take you to a depressing 
state of mind. All these are perceptions we have. We create so 
much misery over perceiving ourselves to be black or white, or 
members of a certain nationality or class. In England people 
suffer because of their perception of belonging to a certain 
class; in America we suffer from not having any perceptions 
of class, from the perception that we’re all the same, we’re all 
equal. It’s the attachment to any of these, even to the highest, 
most egalitarian perception, that takes us to despair.
By investigating these five ‘heaps’, 2 aggregates or groups, you 
begin to see them. You can know them as objects because they’re 
anattā, not-self. If they were what you are, you wouldn’t be 
able to see them. You’d only be able to be them. You’d have no 
way of witnessing them or detaching from them, you’d just be 
caught into them all the time, without any ability to detach and 
observe them. But being men, women, monks, nuns, Italian, 
Danish, Swiss, English, American, Canadian or whatever is 
only a relative truth, relative to certain situations.
Yet we can operate our lives from fixed positions, of being ‘I’m 
American’ and ‘We’re this way’. Throughout the world we have 
those national prejudices and racial prejudices. These are just 
perception and conception ( saññā/saṅkhārā khandhā) that 
we can observe. When you have a fixed view about somebody 
2. The literal meaning of khandhā.

THE W AY IT IS

(‘One thing I can’t stand is Hondurans’), you can observe that 
in your mind. Even if you have strong prejudices and feelings 
but you try to get rid of them, that comes from assuming that 
you shouldn’t have any prejudices at all; that you shouldn’t have 
any bad feelings towards anybody, and you should be able to 
accept criticism with an equanimous mind and not feel angry 
or upset. That’s another very idealistic assumption. See that as 
a condition of mind and keep observing. Rather than hating 
ourselves or hating others for being prejudiced, we observe 
the very limitations of any prejudices or perceptions and 
conceptions of the mind. We meditate on the impermanent 
nature of perception. In other words, we don’t try to justify, 
explain, get rid of or change anything. We just try to observe 
that all things change – all that begins ends.
Then we meditate on the viññāṇa khandha: consciousness, the 
sensory consciousness of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind, 
and how one thing goes to another, aware of the movements 
of consciousness of the senses. Looking at something, hearing 
something – this changes very rapidly. All these five khandhā 
are anicca, impermanent. When we chant: ‘ Rūpaṁ aniccaṁ, 
vedanā aniccā, saññā aniccā, saṅkhārā aniccā, viññāṇaṁ 
aniccaṁ’, this is very profound. Then we chant ‘Sabbe saṅkhārā 
aniccā. ‘Saṅkhārā’ here means all conditioned phenomena, all 
sensory experience – the sense organs, the objects of the sense 
organs, the consciousness that arises on contact – all this is 
saṅkhārā and is anicca . All is conditioned. So ‘ saṅkhārā’ here 
includes the other four khandhā: rūpa, vedanā, saññā, viññāṇa.
With this you have a perspective from which the conditioned 
world is infinitely variable and complex. But where do you 
separate saññā from saṅkhārā or saṅkhārā from viññāṇa?

AJAHN SUMEDHO

It’s best not to try to make precise divisions between these 
five aggregates; they’re just convenient means for looking at 
things, helping you to meditate on mental states, the physical 
world and the sensory world. We’re not trying to fix anything 
as permanently saṅkhārā or definitely saññā, but just using 
these labels to observe that the sensory world, from the physical 
to the mental, from coarse to refined, is conditioned, and all 
conditioned phenomena are impermanent. Then you have a way 
of seeing the totality of the conditioned world as impermanent, 
rather than getting involved in it all. In this practice of insight 
meditation we’re not trying to analyze the conditioned world, 
but to detach from it, to see it in a perspective. This is when you 
really begin to comprehend anicca ; you insightfully know that 
‘sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā.’
So any thoughts and beliefs you have are just conditions. But 
I’m not saying that you shouldn’t believe in anything, I’m just 
pointing out a way to see things in perspective, so you’re not 
deluded by them. We won’t grasp the experience of emptiness 
or the Unconditioned, the Deathless, as a personal attainment. 
Some of you have been grasping that one as a kind of personal 
attainment, haven’t you? – ‘I know emptiness. I’ve realized 
emptiness’ – and patting yourselves on the back. That’s not 
‘sabbe dhammā anattā ’, that’s grasping the Unconditioned, 
making it into a condition, ‘me’ and ‘mine.’ When you start 
thinking of yourself as having realized emptiness, you can see 
that also as a condition of the mind. ‘ sabbe dhammā anattā’, 
all things are not-self, not a person, not a permanent soul, 
not a self of any sort. That’s very important to contemplate 
also, because ‘sabbe dhammā’ includes all things, both

THE W AY IT IS

the conditioned phenomena of the sensory world and the
Unconditioned, the Deathless.
Notice that Buddhists make no claim for Deathlessness as 
being a self either – ‘I have an immortal soul’, or ‘God is my true 
nature.’ The Buddha avoided all statements of that nature. Any 
possible conceiving of oneself as anything at all is an obstacle to 
enlightenment, because you attach to an idea again, to a concept 
of self as being part of something. Maybe you think there’s a 
piece of you, a little soul, that joins the bigger one at death. That 
is a conception of the mind that you can know. We’re not saying 
it’s untrue or false, but we’re just being the knowing, knowing 
what can be known. We don’t feel compelled to grasp that as a 
belief; we see it as only something that comes out of the mind, a 
condition of the mind, so we let even that go.
Keep that formula: ‘ All conditions are impermanent, all things 
are not-self ’ for reflection. And then whatever happens in your 
life as you live it, you can see: ‘ Sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā, sabbe 
dhammā anattā.’ It keeps you from being deluded if miraculous 
phenomena happen to you, and it is a way of understanding 
other religious conventions. Christians come along and say: 
‘Only through Jesus Christ can you be saved. You can’t be 
saved through Buddhism. Buddha was only a man, but Jesus 
Christ was the son of God.’ So you think: ‘Oh, I wonder, maybe 
they’re right.’ After all, when you go to one of these born-again 
meetings everybody’s radiating happiness; their eyes are bright 
and they say, ‘Praise the Lord!’ When you go to a Buddhist 
monastery and just sit there for hours on end watching your 
breath, you don’t get high like that, so you might start doubting 
and think: ‘Maybe that’s right, maybe Jesus is the way.’ But what 
you can know is that there’s a doubt. Look at that doubt, or the

AJAHN SUMEDHO

feeling of being intimidated by other religions when they come 
on strong, or feeling averse to them, or having prejudices against 
religions. What you can know is that these are perceptions of 
the mind; they come and go and change.
Keep a constant cool reflection on these things, rather than 
trying to figure them out or feel that you have to justify being 
a Buddhist. Christians may say: ‘You don’t do anything for 
the Third World’, and you say: ‘We … we … we … chant! We 
share merit and we radiate loving-kindness.’ That sounds pretty 
weak in a situation where you’re talking about malnutrition 
and starvation in Africa. But now, at this time, there’s this 
opportunity to understand the limits of what you can do. All 
of us would definitely do something about starvation in Africa 
if we could, if we felt that there was something one individual 
could do here and now at this time. Reflect on this – what is 
the real problem at this time? Is it the problem of starvation in 
Africa, or is it human selfishness and ignorance? Isn’t starvation 
in Africa the result of human greed, selfishness, and stupidity?
Therefore we open our minds to the Dhamma. We wisely 
reflect on it and then realize it. Truth is to be realized and 
known within the context of personal experience. But the 
practice is a continuous one – I still practise all the time. Things 
change: people praise and blame, the world goes on. One just 
keeps reflecting on it through: ‘ Sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā, sabbe 
dhammā anattā.’ When you recognize the conditioned and the 
Unconditioned, you have what is called the ability to develop 
the Path, and there’s no more confusion about that. The goal 
now is to realize nibbāna, or the Deathless, or non-attachment 
– to realize what it’s like not to be attached to the five khandhā. 
Realize that when you’re sitting here and you’re really at peace.

THE W AY IT IS

There’s no attachment to the five khandhā then, but you 
might make a perception out of that peacefulness and attach 
to that, and always try to meditate in order to become peaceful 
again according to a perception. That’s why the practice is 
continuously letting go rather than an attainment.
Sometimes when you become calm on retreat, you can have a 
very peaceful mind and you attach to it, so you meditate in order 
to attain that blissful state again. But insight meditation means 
looking into the nature of things, of the five khandhā: seeing 
them as anicca – impermanent; as dukkha – unsatisfactory. 
None of these khandhā  have the ability to give you any kind 
of permanent satisfaction. Their very nature is unsatisfactory 
and anattā.
Start to investigate and wisely consider ‘ Sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā, 
sabbe dhammā anattā ’, rather than thinking you’ve attained 
something or that you’ve got to hold on to that attainment, and 
starting to resent anybody who gets in your way. Note what is 
attachment. When your mind is really concentrated, let go of 
it. Rather than just indulging in that peaceful feeling, attach 
to something. Worry about something. Do it deliberately, so 
that you begin to see how you go out and grasp things or worry 
about losing them.
In your practice, as you begin to understand and experience 
letting go, you begin to realize what Buddhas know: ‘ Sabbe 
saṅkhārā aniccā, sabbe dhammā anattā. ’ It’s not just a string 
of words – even a parrot can say the words, but it’s not an 
enlightened parrot. Insight is different from conceptual 
knowledge. But now you’re penetrating, going deep into this, 
breaking through the illusion of self as being anything at all

AJAHN SUMEDHO

– or nothing; if you believe that you don’t have a self, that’s 
another belief. ‘I believe I don’t have a self. We believe in no 
self.’ You see that the Buddha pointed to the way between 
those two extremes of believing you have a self and believing 
that you don’t have a self. You cannot find anything in the five 
khandhā which is a permanent self or soul: things arise out of 
the Unconditioned, they go back to the Unconditioned. It is 
therefore through letting go, not through adopting any other 
attitude, that we seek to no longer attach to mortal conditions.

THE W AY IT IS

7   |   ... ALL THE TIME IN THE WORLD
As we sit here during this retreat, we have to pay attention 
to things that are not at all interesting. They may even be 
unpleasant and painful. T o endure things patiently rather than 
run off to find something interesting is a good discipline – to be 
able just to endure the boredom, the pain, the anger, the greed; 
all these things, instead of always running away from them. 
Patience is such an important virtue. If we have no patience, 
there is absolutely no possibility of becoming enlightened. Be 
extremely patient.
I liked the kind of meditation where I could sit and grow very 
calm, and when pain would arise in the body I’d want to get 
rid of it so that I could stay in that state of calm. Then I began 
to see that wanting to get rid of pain was a miserable state of 
mind. Sometimes we sit for several hours, sometimes all night 
long. You can run away from physical pain, but after a while 
you begin to come to terms with it. I’ve used practices like 
having all the time in the world to be with pain, rather than 
trying my best to get rid of it in order to come back to my ‘real’ 
meditation. I take time to be with the pains in my body if they 
come up in consciousness, rather than thinking, ‘How can I get 
rid of them to get some bliss?’ Somehow, saying, ‘I have all the

AJAHN SUMEDHO

time in the world, the rest of my life to be with this pain’ would 
stop the tendency to want to get rid of it. My mind would slow 
down for long periods of time, without following or creating a 
desire. Some of you have this idea of conquering pain, getting 
over the ‘pain threshold’, but that’s a disaster ...

THE W AY IT IS

8  |   THIS IS THE WAY IT IS
‘This is the way it is’ is a skilful reflection. Venerable Buddhadāsa 
Bhikkhu, the renowned Thai sage, said: ‘If there was to be a 
useful inscription to put on a medallion around your neck, it 
would be: “This is the way it is.”’ This reflection helps us to 
contemplate, wherever we happen to be, in whatever time and 
place, good or bad, ‘This is the way it is.’ It is a way of bringing 
an acceptance into our minds, a noting rather than a reaction.
The practice of meditation is reflecting on ‘the way it is’ in order 
to see the fears and desires which we create. This is quite a simple 
practice, but the practice of Dhamma should be very, very 
simple rather than complicated. Many methods of meditation 
are very, very complicated, with many stages and techniques, 
so one becomes addicted to complicated things. Sometimes we 
don’t really know how things are because of our attachment to 
views. However, the more simple we become, the more clear, 
profound and meaningful everything is to us.
For example, consider the people here, the monks and nuns 
we live with. Maybe we feel attracted to some, we feel averse 
to some, we sympathize with some, we understand some, some 
we don’t understand; but whatever view we have, we can see 
it as just a ‘view’ of a person rather than a real person. We can 
hear ourselves saying, ‘I don’t want him to be like that ... I want 
him to be otherwise. He should be this other way, shouldn’t be

AJAHN SUMEDHO

like this.’ ‘I want it to be otherwise’ is the wail of the age. Why 
can’t life be otherwise? Why do people have to die? Why do 
we have to grow old? Why this sickness? Why do we have to be 
separated from our loved ones? Why do innocent children who 
wouldn’t hurt anyone in their lives, old people who wouldn’t 
hurt anyone, have to suffer from starvation or brutality?
There is always some horrible new thing happening. The other 
day someone wrote to me about the Bangladesh Muslims 
trying to get rid of Buddhist hill tribes in the Chittagong Hill 
Tracts through genocide. Then we hear about Iranians trying 
to eradicate the Bahais ... it goes on endlessly. There are always 
clashes between groups, one trying to take over another’s land 
or power. This has been going on since who knows when. 
Someone has always been trying to exterminate someone else 
since Cain murdered Abel – and that was a long time ago! But 
each time we hear of these atrocities we say, ‘How terrible … it 
shouldn’t be ...’
We hear about American drug companies selling poisonous and 
horrible drugs to the Third World countries. ‘That shouldn’t 
be! Dreadful.’ The pollution of the planet, the despoiling of 
the environment, the killing of dolphins and whales … where 
does it end? What can you do about it? It seems to be an endless 
problem of human ignorance. At a time when people should 
know better, they are doing the most horrendous things to each 
other. It is a time of gloomy predictions: earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions and diseases – it shouldn’t be like this.
Saying, ‘This is the way it is’ is not approval or a refusal to do 
anything, but a way of establishing oneself in the knowledge 
that Nature is ‘like this.’ In the animal kingdom it’s very much

THE W AY IT IS

a question of survival of the fittest, a natural self-selecting law 
where the weaker strains are destroyed, so in that way even 
Nature is quite brutal. We think of Nature as being everything 
it ‘should’ be – sweet, with flowers, and sunshine – but Nature 
is also very brutal. What is our position in Nature? We can live 
on the level of the animal kingdom, with its emphasis on the 
survival of the fittest, the strong over the weak, and living by fear 
and power. We can live like that because we share that animal 
mentality. We have an animal body and it has to survive like 
any other animal body on this planet. So the law of the jungle is 
something human beings can subscribe to – and many of them 
do. But this is only a lower level. If we live on that level, we must 
expect the world to be as it is, in a state of fear, and anxiety. But 
as human beings we can get beyond this animal level; we can 
decide to have some kind of moral standard to abide by, so that 
we don’t have to live our lives in a state of anxiety.
But even higher than that is our ability to realize the Truth – to 
contemplate existence, to cultivate the reflective mind through 
which we can transcend personality. At the level of moral be -
haviour we still have very strong personality view, and in our 
civilization we’ve developed a sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ to ab -
surdity. So strong is this sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’, that it seems 
to dominate everything and taint everything we do, and there’s 
always a sense of anguish and suffering connected with it. Contemplate that whenever there is a sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ in 
anything, it always seems to give rise to discontentment, un -
certainty or doubt, guilt, fear or anxiety. There is this view of 
‘me’ as an individual being, that ‘this’ is mine, that ‘I’ should 
or should not, coming from a belief in oneself as the body or 
mental conditions. However, this view is based on an illusion;

AJAHN SUMEDHO

it comes from conditioning, not from insight. So as long as we 
identify with the limitations of the body and the mind, then of 
course we are going to experience doubt, despair, anguish, sor -
row, grief and lamentation – these mental forms of suffering. 
How could it be otherwise? We’re certainly not going to get enlightenment from distorted misunderstanding and wrong view.
We have this opportunity now to establish right view and right 
understanding, which free us from the personality illusion: 
identification with what are called the five khandhā – body, 
feeling,  perception, mental formations and consciousness. So 
we contemplate consciousness through the senses – the eye, ear, 
nose, tongue and body. We can contemplate mental formations, 
the yesterdays of our own creation and the thoughts and views 
that we create. We can see them as impermanent.
We have this ability to contemplate the nature of things, the 
ability to say, ‘This is the way it is.’ We can notice ‘the way it is’ 
without adopting a personality viewpoint. So with the breath 
of the body, its weight, its posture, we are just witnessing and 
noting, observing how it is now, in this moment. The mood of 
the mind, whether we feel bright or dull, happy or unhappy, is 
something we can know, we can witness. And the empty mind, 
empty of the proliferations about oneself and others, is clarity. 
It’s intelligent and compassionate.
The more we really look into the habits we have developed, the 
clearer things become for us. So we must be willing to suffer, 
to be bored, and to be miserable and anguished; this is an 
opportunity to bear with these unpleasant mental states rather 
than suppress them. Having been born, this is the way it is, at 
this time, in this place.

THE W AY IT IS

9  |   THE RAFT
The Buddha pointed to the way of seeing things as they are; this 
is what we mean by enlightenment. Seeing the way it actually 
is, we aren’t doomed to live in a realm from which there’s no 
way out. There’s a clear way out of this realm of misery; a very 
precise way.
The Buddha said: ‘I teach only two things: suffering and the end 
of suffering.’ So Buddhism is a baffling religion to Westerners, 
because it has no doctrinal position. It doesn’t make doctrinal 
statements about ultimate reality or anything else: there’s just 
suffering and the end of suffering. That is to be realized, and to 
realize the end of suffering, you have to admit and really know 
what suffering is, because the problem isn’t with suffering, but 
with delusion and grasping. And we really have to understand 
suffering – according to the sermon of the Four Noble Truths, 
suffering is to be understood. There is suffering. It should be 
understood. In our daily life here at Amaravati we notice when 
we are suffering.
We can blame it on the weather, the people or whatever, but 
that’s not the point, because even if someone is treating us badly, 
that’s just the way the world is. Sometimes people treat us well, 
sometimes they treat us badly, because of this worldly concern 
for conditions; but the suffering is something we create.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

In a monastery we’re trying to act in responsible ways, so that 
we’re not intentionally causing anyone to suffer. We’re here to 
encourage each other towards moral responsibility, towards 
cooperation, kindness, compassion. That’s our intention. 
Sometimes we get lost – we blow up at each other, or we do 
things that aren’t very nice – but that’s not our intention; these 
are the heedless moments. I conduct myself in a moral way not 
only for my own benefit, for my own practice, but out of respect 
for you and towards the Sangha, and towards the community 
around us: to be someone who lives within the restraints of the 
moral precepts. Then my intention is towards my relationship 
with you, towards mettā , kindness and compassion, joy, calm, 
serenity. Every one of us at least intends to do good and refrain 
from doing evil. That helps us to look at the suffering we create 
in a community with those aims – because a lot of you really 
suffer here. And this is to be understood. It’s the first Noble 
Truth, dukkha: the suffering of not getting what we want; 
the suffering of things not being the way we want them, of 
separation from what we like; the suffering of having to do that 
which we don’t want to do, of having to be restrained when we 
want to be unrestrained.
I think of how easy it is to create you in my mind: ‘The nuns 
are like this: the anagārikas are like that, bhikkhus are like this,’ 
and so forth. One can have these biases: ‘Women are this way; 
men are that way, Americans are like this and the English are 
like that.’ We can believe that, but these are perceptions of the 
mind, views that arise and cease. And yet we can create a lot of 
suffering about them: ‘This one doesn’t come to the morning 
chanting’, or ‘That one isn’t doing their share of the work and 
this one thinks they’re too important’, or whatever. But the

THE W AY IT IS

important point is the suffering, the dukkha, because when we 
have that, we create despair in our minds. We become annoyed, 
indignant and that takes us to a sense of despair. If we don’t 
understand dukkha here, we won’t understand it no matter 
where we are: in London, Bangkok or Washington DC; on a 
mountaintop or in a valley; with good people or bad people. So 
it’s really important to observe suffering, to know dukkha.
There are three insights into the first Noble Truth: there is 
dukkha; it should be understood; it has been understood. 
That’s how insight works: recognition that there’s something to 
understand and beginning to know when we understand it. So 
those are the three insights into the first Noble Truth.
The second Noble Truth is the origin of dukkha : there is an 
origin, it’s due to the grasping of desire. The second insight of 
the second Noble Truth is that this attachment to desire – this 
identification with desire being ‘me’ and ‘mine’, this following 
of desire – should be let go of, leaving it as it is. Then the third 
insight of the second Noble Truth is: desire has been let go of – 
through practice, dukkha has been let go of.
There is the first insight into each of the Truths, pariyatti – an 
observing that there is suffering, its origin and so forth. Then 
there’s paṭipatti or insight into practice: what we do, how we 
practise. And the third insight is paṭivedha or wisdom. It has 
been understood; it has been let go of.
When there is the insight, ‘The origin of suffering has been 
let go of ’, there is knowledge of that result – actually letting 
go. You know what it’s like not to be attached to something. 
Holding a clock is like this, and when I put it down I’m aware 
of what not holding it is like. If I’m holding things and I’m

AJAHN SUMEDHO

heedless, I don’t even notice when I’m no longer holding them, 
when there’s no grasping. I’m not aware of it. Really ignorant 
and heedless people are so caught up with grasping that even 
though they’re not grasping something all the time, the habit is 
such that they only notice when they are grasping at something. 
Many of you may only feel fully alive when you’re filled with 
greed or anger in some form or other. So letting go can be quite 
frightening to people; when they let go of things, they may feel 
they’re no longer alive.
There’s a lot of investment in being a person. Even the view 
that ‘I have a bad temper; I have a lot of anger’ can be a kind of 
conceit. If I’m angry, I feel very much alive. Sexual desire makes 
the ‘I’ feel alive – that’s why there’s so much obsession with sex 
in modern European lives. And when there’s no sexual desire, 
no anger, I want to fall asleep. I’m nothing. When there’s no 
mindfulness at all, one just has to seek more sensual pleasure 
– to eat something, drink something, take drugs or watch 
something on TV , read something or do something dangerous. 
You can break the law just because it’s exciting to do so. But 
imagine trying to get people to spend a weekend just holding 
a clock and noticing what that is like! What a waste of time! I 
could be out terrorizing the police, I could be at a disco with 
strobe lights, music blaring in my ears, pot, LSD and Scotch! 
Being attentive to the way things are, no longer just distracting 
the mind, sounds really painful by comparison.
This evening we’re going to sit in meditation until midnight. 
It’s a chance to observe more fully what it’s like to be sitting; 
what it’s like when the mind is filled with thoughts and when 
there are no thoughts; when there is suffering and when there 
isn’t suffering. If you have a view that sitting until midnight

THE W AY IT IS

is going to be suffering, you have already committed yourself 
to suffering until midnight. But if you start examining that 
very view, fear or doubt in your mind for what it is, you can 
observe when it’s present and when it’s not present. If you’re 
not suffering, you’re not thinking there’s any suffering. Then 
this feeling of suffering comes and you attach to the view, ‘I’m 
suffering, and I have to sit up and I’m tired.’ This is the first 
Noble Truth: ‘There’s suffering, suffering is to be understood’ 
through an admission, a recognition and an understanding.
The insight of the second Noble Truth is to let go, to leave 
alone, not to make anything out of an all-night sitting. These 
are perceptions. They’re nothing, really: if you’re using the 
situation for reflection and contemplation of when there is 
suffering, then there isn’t suffering. I’m aware of holding this 
thought, grasping this thought or not grasping this thought. 
One can pick things up or put them down, knowing how to 
use them rather than having a blind obsession to grasp or reject 
them. I can put down the clock but I don’t have to throw it 
away. But it’s not that holding the clock is wrong, unless there 
is ignorance about it. One is aware of grasping and the nongrasping, holding and not holding.
The third Noble Truth is the cessation of suffering. When 
you let go of something and you realize letting go, your habits 
become your teachers. When you let go of suffering, suffering 
ceases. ‘There is cessation and it should be realized’ – this is 
the second insight into the third Noble Truth. And this is our 
practice: to realize cessation, to notice when suffering ceases. 
It’s not that everything’s going to disappear, but the feeling of 
suffering and ‘I am’ ceases. This is not to be believed but to be

AJAHN SUMEDHO

realized, and then there is the third insight – that cessation has 
been realized.
This leads to the insight into the fourth Noble Truth 
concerning the Eightfold Path, the way out of suffering. These 
insights connect to one another. It’s not that first you do one 
and then you do another; they support each other. As we have 
the insight into letting go, as we realize cessation, there is right 
understanding and the rest follows from that – the development 
of wisdom or paññā.
Don’t see this as something that deals just with very deep and 
important issues, because it’s about the here and now, the way 
things are. We’re not thinking about extreme situations to work 
with, but just sitting, standing, walking, lying down, breathing, 
feeling as normal beings, living in a moral environment with 
the way it is. We don’t have to go into hell to really see suffering, 
we’re not seeking it. We can create hell at Amaravati, not 
because Amaravati is hell, but because we create it with all kinds 
of miserable things from our mind, and this is the suffering we 
can work with. It’s just the suffering in this normal human 
realm, where our intentions are to refrain from doing evil, to do 
good, to develop virtue, and to be kind.
But there’s still enough suffering here to contemplate these 
Four Noble Truths with their twelve aspects. You can 
memorize them: then wherever you are you’ve got something to 
contemplate. Eventually you let go of all these things, because 
they aren’t ends in themselves either, but like tools to be used. 
You learn to use these tools, and when you’ve finished you don’t 
need to hang on to them.

THE W AY IT IS

T o signify this the Buddha referred to his teaching as a raft that 
you can make out of the things around you. You don’t have to 
have a special motorboat, submarine or luxury liner. A raft is 
something you make from the things around, just to get across 
to the other shore. We’re not trying to make a super-duper 
vehicle, we’re able to use what’s around us for enlightenment.
The raft is to carry us across the sea of ignorance, and when we 
get to the other shore, we can let it go – which doesn’t mean we 
have to throw it away. This ‘other shore’ can also be a delusion, 
because the other shore and this one are really the same shore. 
It’s merely an allegory. We have never really left the other shore; 
we’ve always been on the other shore anyway, and the raft is 
something we use to remind us that we don’t really need a raft.
So there’s absolutely nothing to do but to be mindful, to be 
able to sit, stand, walk, lie down, eat food, breathe – and all the 
opportunities as humans to do good.
In the human realm we have this lovely opportunity to be good, 
to be kind, to be generous, to love others, to serve others, to 
help others. These are some of the most lovely qualities of being 
human. We can decide not to do evil. We don’t have to kill, lie, 
steal, go around distracting ourselves and drugging ourselves, 
getting lost in moods and feelings. We can be free from all that. 
The human form is a wonderful opportunity to refrain from 
evil and do good, not in order to store up merit for the next life, 
but because this is the beauty of our humanity. Being a human 
can be a joyful experience rather than an onerous task. So when 
we contemplate this, we really begin to appreciate this birth in 
a human form. We feel grateful to have this opportunity to live

AJAHN SUMEDHO

with our teacher, the Buddha and our practice, the Dhamma, 
and to live in the Sangha.
The Sangha represents the human community as unified 
in virtuousness and moral restraint; it is the soul force of the 
human realm. That which is truly benevolent in humanity 
has its effect on the moral aspects that abide in the human 
realm, so all sentient beings are benefited by it. What would the 
world be like if humanity were just selfish, with every man for 
himself, endlessly making demands, not caring about others at 
all? It would be a terrible place to live. So we don’t do that; we 
abide in the Sangha, an abiding where we live together within a 
convention that encourages morality and respect for each other. 
This is for reflection, for contemplation; you have to know it 
for yourself, nobody can realize it for you. You have to arouse 
yourself and not depend on something external to push you or 
hold you up.
We even have to let go of our need to be inspired. We have to 
develop strength until we no longer need any kind of inspiration 
or encouragement from anyone else, because inspiration isn’t 
wisdom. You get high – ‘ Ajahn Sumedho’s wonderful’ – and 
then after a while you don’t get high on me any more and think: 
‘ Ajahn Sumedho’s disappointing, he’s let me down.’ Inspiration 
is like eating chocolate: it tastes good and it’s very attractive, but 
it’s not going to nourish you; it only energizes momentarily and 
that’s all it can do. So it’s not wise to depend on whether people 
live in the way that you want them to live, or that they will never 
disappoint you.
It’s so important to develop insight through practice, because 
inspiration wears out, and if you are attached to and blinded

THE W AY IT IS

by it, you are in for terrible disillusionment and bitterness. 
There’s a lot of this with different charismatic guru figures 
who teach around the world. It’s not balanced. You may 
become intoxicated by somebody else’s charisma, but you 
can’t maintain it, so you inevitably fall down into some 
lower state. The way of mindfulness, however, is always 
appropriate to the time and the place, to the way things are 
in their good and bad aspects. Then suffering isn’t dependent 
on the world being good or bad, but on how willing we 
are to use wisdom in this present moment. The way out of 
suffering is now, through being able to see things as they are.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

PATIENCE  |   10   
Peacefulness and tranquillity can be incredibly boring, and
a lot of restlessness and doubt can come up as a result. 
Restlessness is a common problem because the sensory realm is a 
restless realm; bodies are restless, minds are restless. Conditions 
are changing all the time, so if you are caught up in reacting
to change, you’re restless.
Restlessness needs to be thoroughly understood for what it is; 
the practice is not one of using the will to bind yourself to the 
meditation mat. It’s not a test of your becoming a strong person 
who has to conquer restlessness – that attitude just reinforces 
another egotistical view. It is a matter of really investigating 
restlessness, noticing it and knowing it for what it is. For this 
we have to develop patience; it’s something we have to learn and 
really work with.
When I first went to Wat Pah Pong I couldn’t understand Lao. 
In those days Ajahn Chah was at his peak and giving threehour desanās every evening. He could go on and on and on, 
and everybody loved him – he was a very good speaker, very 
humorous and everybody enjoyed his talks. But if you couldn’t 
understand Lao ...! I’d be sitting there thinking, ‘When is 
he going to stop, I’m wasting my time.’ I’d be really angry, 
thinking, ‘I’ve had enough, I’m leaving.’ But I couldn’t get

THE W AY IT IS

up enough nerve to leave, so I would just sit there thinking, 
‘I’ll go to another monastery. I’ve had enough of this, I’m not 
going to put up with this.’ And then he would look at me – 
he had the most radiant smile – and he’d say: ‘ Are you all 
right?’ And suddenly all the anger that had been accumulating 
for those three hours would completely drop away. That’s 
interesting, isn’t it? After sitting there fuming for three
hours, it would just go.
So I vowed that my practice would be patience, and that during 
this time I would develop patience. I’d come to all the talks and 
sit through all of them as long as I could physically stand it. I 
determined not to miss them or try to get out of them, and just 
practise patience. And by doing that, I began to find that the 
opportunity to be patient was something that helped me very 
much. Patience is a very firm foundation for my insight and 
understanding of the Dhamma; without it I would just have 
wandered about, drifting as you see so many people doing.
Many Westerners came to Wat Pah Pong and drifted away from 
it because they weren’t patient. They didn’t want to sit through 
three- hour desanās and be patient. They wanted to go to the 
places where you could get instant enlightenment quickly in 
the way you wanted.
Because we can be driven by selfish desires and ambitions even 
on the spiritual path, we can’t always really appreciate the way 
things are. When I actually contemplated and reflected on my 
life at Wat Pah Pong, I realized that it was a very good situation: 
there was a good teacher, there was enough to eat, the monks 
were good monks, the laypeople were very generous and kind, 
and there was encouragement towards the practice of Dhamma.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

This is as good as you can get; it was a wonderful opportunity, 
and yet so many Westerners couldn’t see that because they 
tended to think, ‘I don’t like this, I don’t want that’, and ‘It 
should be otherwise’ and ‘What I think and what I feel, I don’t 
want to be bothered with this and that.’
I remember going up to Tam Saeng Phet monastery, which was 
a very quiet secluded place in those years, and I lived in a cave. 
A villager built me a platform, because in the depths of this cave 
was a big python. One evening I was sitting on this platform by 
candlelight; it was really eerie and the light cast shadows on all 
the rocks. It was weird. I was sitting there and I started to get 
really frightened, and then suddenly I was startled. I looked up 
and there was a huge owl right above, looking at me. It looked 
immense – I don’t know if it was really that big, but it looked 
enormous in the candlelight, and it was looking straight at me. 
I thought, ‘Well what is there to be really frightened of here?’ 
and I tried to imagine skeletons and ghosts, or Mother Kali 
with fangs and blood dripping out of her mouth, or enormous 
monsters with green skin; and I began to laugh because it 
became so amusing. I realized I wasn’t really frightened at all.
In those days I was just a very junior monk, and one night Ajahn 
Chah took us to a village fête. I think Satimanto Bhikkhu was 
there at the time. We were all very serious practitioners and we 
didn’t want any kind of frivolity or foolishness; and of course 
going to a village fête was the last thing we wanted to do, because 
in these villages they love loudspeakers. But Ajahn Chah took 
Satimanto and me to this fête, and we had to sit up all night with 
the raucous sounds of the loudspeakers going and monks giving 
talks all night long. I kept thinking, ‘Oh, I want to get back to 
my cave – green-skinned monsters and ghosts are much better

THE W AY IT IS

than this.’ I noticed that Satimanto, who was incredibly serious, 
was looking really angry and critical, and very unhappy, and we 
just sat there looking miserable. I thought: ‘Why does Ajahn 
Chah bring us to these things?’ Then I began to see for myself. 
I remember sitting there thinking, ‘Here I am getting all upset 
over this. Is it that bad? What’s really bad is what I’m making 
out of it, what’s really miserable is my mind. Loudspeakers and 
noise, and distraction and sleepiness, one can put up with them, 
but it’s that awful thing in my mind that hates them, resents 
them and wants to leave – that’s the real misery!’
That evening I could see what misery I could create in my mind 
over things that one can bear. I remember that as a very clear 
insight of what I thought was miserable, and what really is 
miserable. At first I was blaming the people, the loudspeakers, 
the disruption, the noise and the discomfort – I thought that 
was the problem. Then I realized that it wasn’t, it was my mind 
that was miserable.
If we reflect on and contemplate Dhamma, we learn from the 
very situations which we like the least – if we have the will
to do so.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

ACCEPTING THE WAY  |   11   
 THINGS ARE
How many of you have been practising today trying to become 
something – ‘I have got to do this, or become that, or get rid 
of something, or got to do something’? That compulsiveness 
takes over, even in our practice of Dhamma. ‘This is the way 
it is’ isn’t a fatalistic attitude of not caring or being indifferent, 
but a real openness to the way things have to be at this moment. 
For example, right now at this moment this is the way it is, 
and it can’t be any other way at this moment. It’s so obvious, 
isn’t it? Right now, no matter whether you are feeling high 
or low or indifferent, happy or depressed, enlightened or
totally deluded, half-enlightened, half-deluded, three-quarters 
deluded, one-quarter enlightened, hopeful or despairing 
– this is the way it is. And it can’t be any other way at this 
moment. This doesn’t mean we can’t try to make things better, 
but we do so from understanding and wisdom, rather than
from an ignorant desire.
How does your body feel? Just notice that the body is this way. 
It’s heavy, it’s earthbound, it’s coarse; it gets hungry, it feels heat 
and cold, it gets sick; sometimes it feels very nice, sometimes it 
feels horrible. This is the way it is. Human bodies are like this, 
so this tendency to want them to be otherwise falls away. The 
world is this way. Things happen: it snows and the sun comes

THE W AY IT IS

out, people come and go, people have misunderstandings, 
people’s feelings get hurt. People grow lazy or inspired, 
depressed and disillusioned; people gossip and disappoint each 
other. There’s adultery, theft, drunkenness and drug addiction; 
and there are wars, and there always have been.
Here in a community like Amaravati we can see the way things 
are. Now it’s the weekend, when more people come to offer 
alms-food and it’s more crowded and noisy. There are people 
pounding vegetables and chopping things, with everything 
going all over the place, and sometimes there are children 
running up and down screaming. You can observe, ‘This is the 
way it is’ rather than think, ‘These people are impinging on my 
silence.’ ‘I don’t want it to be like that, I want it to be otherwise’, 
might be the reaction if you like the quiet orderliness of the 
meal when there’s none of that activity, and there are no loud 
noises or harsh sounds. But life is like this, this is the way life is, 
this is human existence. So in our minds we embrace the whole 
of it, and ‘This is the way it is’ allows us to accept the changes 
and movements from the silent to the noisy, from the controlled 
and ordered to the confused and muddled.
One can be a very selfish Buddhist, wanting life to be very quiet 
and to be able to ‘practise’, with plenty of time for sitting, plenty 
of time for studying the Dhamma and thinking, ‘I don’t want 
to have to receive guests and talk to people about silly things, I 
don’t want to ... blah blah blah.’ You can be a very, very selfish 
person as a Buddhist monk. You can want the world to align 
itself with your dreams and ideals, and when it doesn’t you 
don’t want it anymore. But rather than make things the way 
you want them, the Buddha’s way is to notice the way things 
are. And it’s a great relief when you accept the way it is, even if

AJAHN SUMEDHO

it’s not very nice; because the only real misery is not wanting 
it to be like that. Whether things are going well or not so well, 
if we don’t accept the way things are, the mind tends to create 
some form of misery. 
So if you are attached to things going nicely, you’ll start 
worrying if they go less well, even when they are actually 
still going well. I have noticed that with little things, such as 
when it’s a sunny day and one jumps for joy – then the next 
thought will be, ‘But in England the sun can disappear in the 
next moment.’ As soon as I’ve grasped one perception and 
I’m jumping for joy at the sunshine, the unpleasant thought 
arises that it may not last. Whatever you’re attached to will 
bring on its opposite. And when things aren’t going very well, 
the mind tends to think: ‘I want them to get better than this.’
So suffering arises whenever there is the grasping of desire.
The sensory world is pleasurable and painful, it’s beautiful 
and ugly, it’s neutral; there are all gradations, all possibilities 
in it. This is just what sensory experience is about. But when 
ignorance and the self- view are operating, I only want pleasure 
and I don’t want pain. I want only beauty and I don’t want 
ugliness: ‘Please, God, please make me healthy, give me a 
good complexion, physical attractiveness, and let me stay 
young for a long time, get lots of money, wealth and power, 
no sickness, no cancer, lots of beautiful things around me; 
surround me with beauty and the pleasures of the senses at 
their best, please.’ Then the fear will come that maybe I’ll get 
the worst. I could get leprosy, AIDS, Parkinson’s disease or 
cancer. And I might be rejected and despised and humiliated, 
left alone out in the cold, hungry, sick and in danger, with
wolves howling and the wind blowing.

THE W AY IT IS

From the viewpoint of the self, there’s a tremendous fear of 
rejection, ostracism or being despised in our society. There’s a 
fear of being left alone and unwanted; there’s a fear of being 
old, and left to die alone, there’s natural fear of physical danger, 
of being in situations where our bodies are in danger; and 
there’s the fear of the unknown, the mysterious, ghosts and 
unseen spirits. So we gravitate to security – cosy little places 
with electricity, central heating, insurance and guarantees on 
everything – taxes paid and legal contracts. All of these give us a 
sense of safety. Or we seek emotional security: ‘Say you’ll always 
love me, dear. Say you’ll love me even if you don’t mean it. Make 
everything safe and secure.’ And in that demand there’s always 
going to be anxiety because of the grasping at desire.
So monastics are developing a light around the uplifting of the 
human spirit rather than around material guarantees. As almsmendicants you take the risk that you might not get anything to 
eat. You might not have a shelter, you might not have any really 
good medicine, you might not have anything nice to wear. 
People are very generous, but as mendicants we don’t take that 
for granted, assuming that we deserve it. We are grateful for 
whatever is offered, and cultivate the attitude of few wants, few 
needs. We need to make ourselves ready to be able to leave and 
relinquish everything at any moment, to have the kind of mind 
that doesn’t think, ‘This is my home, I want it to be guaranteed 
to me for the rest of my life.’ No matter how it goes, we adapt, 
our needs are few. And so we make adaptations to life, to time 
and place, rather than making demands. Whatever way it goes 
is the way it is. Whatever diseases we may catch, or whatever 
tragedies, catastrophes or successes we experience, from the 
best to the worst, one can say this is the way it is. And in that

AJAHN SUMEDHO

there is acceptance and non-anger, non- greed and the ability to 
cope with life as it’s happening.
We are not here to become anything, get rid of anything, 
change anything, make anything for ourselves or demand 
anything, but to awaken more and more, to reflect, observe and 
know the Dhamma. Don’t worry that things might change for 
the worse. However they change, we have the wisdom to adapt 
to them. And I can see that this is the real fearlessness of the 
alms-mendicant life. We can adapt, we can learn wisely from 
all conditions, because this lifetime is not our real home. This 
lifetime is a transition we’re involved in, a journey through the 
sensory realm, and there are no nests, no homes, no abiding 
in this sensory realm. It’s all very impermanent, subject to 
disruption and change at any moment. That is its nature. That’s 
the way it is. There is nothing depressing about that if you no 
longer make the demand for security in it.
The reality of existence is that there isn’t any home here. So the 
homeless life, going forth into mendicancy, is what is called a 
heavenly messenger, because the religious spirit no longer shares 
the delusions of the worldly mind, which is very determined 
to have a material home and security. Instead you have the 
trust in Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, and the teaching and the 
opportunities as mendicants and meditators to develop the 
insight and understanding to free the mind from the anxieties 
that come from attachment to the sensory realm as a home.
The idea of owning, and hanging on to things is the illusion 
of the worldly life. The view of the self sends forth all these 
delusions, from which we have to protect ourselves all the 
time. We’re always endangered, there’s always something to be

THE W AY IT IS

worried about, something to be frightened of. But when that 
illusion is punctured with wisdom there is fearlessness; we see 
this is a journey, a transition through the sensory realm, and 
we are willing to learn the lessons it teaches us no matter what 
those lessons might be.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

CONSCIOUSNESS  |   12   
 AND SENSITIVITY
Sometimes we approach meditation from a way of thinking 
that is based on trying to get rid of unwanted mental states 
and control the mind. However, it’s better to see meditation 
as an opportunity to be mindful, to be at peace with yourself 
and with whatever mood you happen to be in at this moment, 
rather than trying to achieve some kind of desired state. Learn 
to be one who’s at peace with the way things are.
When I started meditation in Thailand, the way I had lived my 
life before I became a monk affected my meditation practice. 
I began to let go of things and to accept all my ambitious and 
aggressive tendencies, and to be attentive to the way things 
are. The more you trust in this, the more quickly you will 
understand it’s the way out of suffering.
Notice how things affect your mind. If you’re starting a 
meditation period having just come from your work, notice 
what that does to your mind. If the mind isn’t tranquil and 
pure and serene, don’t criticize it, notice the busyness of it 
all: you’ve been travelling in the rush hour, working at the 
keyboard, talking on the telephone, and maybe having to work 
with people you don’t like in difficult, aggravating situations.

THE W AY IT IS

Just notice all of it; these things do have an effect on us. This is 
the experience of consciousness and sensitivity.
It is what being born as a human being amounts to. You’re born, 
you have to live a lifetime as a conscious being in a very sensitive 
form, and what impinges on you, what comes to you from the 
objective world is going to affect you. There’s nothing wrong 
with that, it’s just the way it is. The problem is we tend to make 
everything very personal. We feel like it’s wrong: ‘I shouldn’t 
be affected by these things that impinge on me; I shouldn’t feel 
anger, or aversion, or greed, or irritation and frustration, envy, 
jealousy, fear, anxiety – I shouldn’t be feeling these things. If 
I were a normal, healthy person, I wouldn’t have any of these 
problems; I wouldn’t be sensitive at all, like a rhinoceros 
with a tough hide that nothing could ever get through – so 
maybe I’m not normal!’ But it’s just the way it is. Life is like 
this. Because we are human, we have these extremely sensitive 
forms and there’s nothing really wrong with that. There are 
many irritating things about aspects of our lives, but being 
sensitive is like that, isn’t it? Sensitivity means that whatever 
it is, pleasant or unpleasant, pleasurable, painful, beautiful,
ugly, we’re going to feel it.
So the way out of suffering is through mindfulness and notself. There is only the awareness of our true nature: blissful 
and serene and pure. If we find this peace and serenity depends 
upon conditions being a certain way, and we need to control 
these conditions in order to abide in the blissful serenity of the 
purity of the mind, then it’s all coming from desire: ‘wrong 
view.’ Mindfulness and understanding allows you to adapt 
and accept life – the total life experience – without having to 
control it. You don’t have to hold on to the bits and pieces you

AJAHN SUMEDHO

like, and feel threatened by the possibility of being separated 
from them. Right meditation really allows you to be brave and 
adaptable, to be flexible and all that implies.
Things happen. Mother Nature has a way of letting us know 
that she’s not just going to go along with our desires. If we try 
to control everything, and make it so that we are not being 
affected by any of it – or only affected in the ways we like, then 
even if we get a measure of control over things, we just increase 
the suffering because conditions are changing all the time.
We have to live with this body for a lifetime, and bodies 
are conscious and sensitive forms. This is what being born 
means: getting old, sickness and then death. By knowing 
the way it is, you find you are capable of accepting life, not 
bewildered by the way life happens to be. If you understand 
it and see it in the right way, you’re not going to have wrong 
view; you’re not going to add to it with fears, desires, bitterness,
resentments and blame.
We have the ability to accept the way life is. Understanding 
Dhamma allows us also to have a fearless attitude. We begin 
to realize that we can accept whatever happens. There’s really 
nothing to be afraid of. Then you can let go of life; you can 
follow it because you’re not expecting anything out of it, 
and you’re not trying to control it. You have the wisdom, the 
mindfulness, the ability to go with the flow, rather than be 
drowned in the tidal wave of life.
Take time to be silent, listen to yourself: the breathing, just 
the natural rhythm of the body, the way your body feels now. 
The body is a condition in nature – it’s not really you. It’s not 
‘my’ breathing any more; it’s not personal. You breathe even if

THE W AY IT IS

you’re sick – and if you’re asleep you’re still breathing. It’s the 
body that breathes. From birth to death it will be breathing. 
So that’s why we use it as an object to focus on, to turn to if 
we’re thinking too much. When thoughts get convoluted and 
complicated, we bring attention to the ordinary breathing of 
the body at this moment and we aren’t lost in thought anymore; 
we are being attentive to a natural rhythm. But as soon as you 
start thinking, you can’t concentrate on the breath; it becomes 
a ‘me’ again, and ‘I’ am trying to be mindful of my breath. But 
when you’re just with the breath, there’s no self. Your self will 
arise when you start thinking and when you’re not thinking, 
there’s no self. When you’re mindful, thought isn’t coming 
from wrong view, the view that ‘I am a self.’
Thought can be a way of reflection, a way of focusing attention 
on Dhamma, rather than of creating problems of self-criticism 
or anxiety about yourself and humanity. When you get angry 
and you’re thinking, ‘He said that to me, how dare he! That 
dirty so and so!’ – if you stop thinking and just use the breath, 
eventually the feeling of the body that comes with anger will 
fade away, and then there is no anger. So if you feel angry, just 
reflect on what it feels like as a physical feeling.
It’s the same with any mood: contemplate, reflect on the mood 
that you’re in; just work with it – not to analyze it or criticize it – 
just reflect on it, how it is. Some people say, ‘I get very confused 
when I meditate – how can I get rid of confusion?’ Wanting 
to get rid of confusion is the problem. Being confused and not 
wanting it to be like that just creates more confusion. So what 
does it feel like? Confusion may not feel like the more stimulating 
passions we can have that are quite obvious. We tend to not pay 
any attention to the more subtle states like hesitation, or doubt,

AJAHN SUMEDHO

and slight anxiety. Of course, one side of us just wants to get rid 
of all that, just stomp it out – but with the right understanding, 
we see that the very ‘desire to get rid of ’ is suffering. In fact, we 
can bear with the feeling of insecurity if we know what it is, and 
that it’s impermanent. With this understanding you begin to 
feel more and more confident in just being aware and mindful.
The mind is sensitive to suggestions and assumptions. This is 
why we’re not trying to develop the practice in order to become 
an enlightened person. Such an assumption fixes you into the 
belief that right now you’re not enlightened – that you’ve got 
a lot of problems, you’ve got to change your life, you’ve got 
to make yourself different and so on – that you’re not good 
enough the way you are right now, so you have to meditate, and 
hopefully some time in the future you’ll become something 
that you’d like to become. Well, if you never see the delusion 
of that way of thinking, then it just carries on! You’ll never 
really become what you should be, no matter how much effort 
you put into your meditation. After years of trying to become 
enlightened, you’ll always feel like a failure. And this is because 
you’ve still got the wrong attitude about it all.

THE W AY IT IS

13   |   THE SOUND OF SILENCE
Then you grow calm you can experience the sound of silence 
in the mind. You hear it as a kind of high frequency sound, a 
ringing sound that’s always there but is normally never noticed. 
When you now begin to hear that sound of silence, it’s a sign 
of emptiness, of the silence of the mind. It’s something you 
can always turn to. As you concentrate on it and turn to it, it 
can make you quite peaceful, blissful. Meditating on that, you 
have a way of letting the conditions of the mind cease, without 
suppressing them with another condition. Otherwise, you just 
end up putting one condition over another.
This process is what is meant by making ‘kamma.’ For example, 
if you’re feeling angry and you start thinking of something else 
to get away from the anger, this is just putting one condition 
on top of another. You don’t like what is going on over here, so 
you look over there, you just run away. But if you have a way of 
turning from conditioned phenomena to the Unconditioned, 
no kind of kamma is being made, and the conditioned habits 
can fade away and cease. It’s like a safety hatch in the mind, the 
way out, so your kammic formations, ( saṅkhārā), have an exit, 
a way of flowing away instead of recreating themselves.
One problem with meditation is that many people find it 
boring. People become bored with emptiness. They want to

AJAHN SUMEDHO

fill up emptiness with something. So recognize that even when 
the mind is quite empty, the desires and habits are still there, 
and they will come and want to do something interesting. 
You have to be patient, willing to turn away from boredom 
and from the desire to do something interesting, and be 
content with the emptiness of the sound of silence. And you 
have to be quite determined in turning towards it. But when 
you begin to listen and understand the mind better, the 
emptiness of the sound of silence is a very realizable possibility 
for all of us. After many years of practice, gross kammic 
formations fade away and the more subtle ones also start to 
fade. The mind becomes increasingly emptier and clearer. But 
it takes a lot of patience, endurance and willingness to keep 
practising under all conditions and to let go even of one’s most
treasured little habits.
One can believe that the sound of silence is ‘something’ or that 
it is an attainment, but it is not a matter of having attained 
anything, but of wisely reflecting on what you experience. The 
way to reflect is that anything that comes goes; and the practice 
is one of knowing things as they are. No kind of identity is 
involved – there is nothing to attach to. Some people who hear 
that sound want to know: ‘Is that stream-entry?’ or: ‘Do we 
have a soul?’ We are so attached to concepts. All we can know 
is that we want to know something, we want to have a label 
for our ‘self ’. If there is a doubt about something, doubt arises 
and then there is desire for something. But the practice is one 
of letting go. We keep with what is, recognizing conditions as 
conditions and the Unconditioned as the Unconditioned. It’s 
as simple as that.

THE W AY IT IS

Even religious aspiration is seen as a condition. This doesn’t 
mean that you shouldn’t aspire, but just that you should 
recognize aspiration in itself as being limited. And emptiness 
is not-self either – attachment to the idea of emptiness is also 
attachment. Let go of that! The practice then becomes one 
of turning away from conditioned phenomena, not creating 
anything more around existing conditions. So whatever 
arises in your consciousness – anger, greed or whatever – you 
recognize it is there but you make nothing out of it. You can 
turn to the emptiness of the mind, to the sound of silence. 
This gives conditions like anger a way out to cessation,
you let them go away.
We have memories of what we have done in the past. They come 
up in consciousness when the conditions are there for them to 
come. That is the resultant kamma of having done something 
in the past, having acted out of ignorance, and done things out 
of greed, hatred and delusion, and so forth. When that kamma 
ripens in the present, the resultant kamma, the impulses of 
greed, hatred and delusion still come up in the mind. Whenever 
we act on them ignorantly, when we aren’t mindful, we create 
more kamma. We can create kamma in two ways: by following 
it or trying to get rid of it. When we stop doing this, the cycles 
of kamma have an opportunity to cease. The resultant kamma 
that has arisen has a way out, an escape hatch to cessation.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

ONLY ONE BREATH  |   14   
Ven. Subbato told me that he had never developed ānāpānasati, 
mindfulness of the breath. So I said: ‘Can you be mindful of 
one inhalation?’ and he said: ‘Oh yes.’ ‘ And of one exhalation?’ 
and he said: ‘Yes.’ And I said: ‘Got it!’ There’s nothing more 
to it than that. However, one tends to expect to develop some 
special kind of ability to go into some special state, and because 
we don’t do that, we think we can’t do ānāpānasati. But the way 
of the spiritual life is through renunciation, relinquishment, 
letting go, not through attaining or acquiring. Even the jhānas3 
are relinquishments rather than attainments. If we relinquish 
more and more, letting go more and more, then the jhānic states 
are natural.
The attitude is most important. T o practise ānāpānasati , one 
brings the attention onto one inhalation, being mindful from 
the beginning to the end. One inhalation, that’s it; and then 
the same goes for the exhalation. That’s the perfect attainment 
of ānāpānasati. The awareness of just that much is the result 
of concentration of the mind through sustained attention to 
the breath, from the beginning to the end of the inhalation, 
from the beginning to the end of the exhalation. The attitude 
is always one of letting go, not attaching to any ideas or feelings 
3. Jhānas: Refined states of mind-consciousness experienced through meditative 
absorption.

THE W AY IT IS

that arise, so that you’re always fresh with the next inhalation, 
the next exhalation, completely as it is. You’re not carrying over 
anything. So it’s a way of relinquishment, of letting go, rather 
than of attaining and achieving.
The danger in meditation practice is the habit of grasping at 
things, grasping at states, so the concept that’s most useful is 
the concept of letting go, rather than of attaining and achieving. 
Maybe yesterday you had a really super meditation, absolutely 
fantastic, just what you’ve always dreamed of; and then today 
you try to get the same wonderful experience as yesterday, but 
you get more restless and more agitated than ever before. Why 
is that? Why can’t we get what we want? It’s because we’re 
trying to attain something that we remember, rather than 
really working with the way things happen to be now. So the 
correct way is one of mindfulness, of looking at the way it is 
now, rather than remembering yesterday and trying to get to 
that state again.
The first year I meditated, I didn’t have a teacher. I was in this 
little kuti in Nong Khai for about ten months, and I had all 
kinds of blazing insights. Being alone for ten months, not 
having to talk, not having to go anywhere, everything calmed 
down after several months, and then I thought I was a fully 
enlightened person, an arahant. I was sure of it. I found out 
later that I wasn’t.
I remember we went through a famine in Nong Khai that 
year, and we didn’t get very much to eat. I had malnutrition, 
so I thought: ‘Maybe malnutrition’s the answer. If I just starve 
myself ...’ I remember being so weak with malnutrition at Nong 
Khai that my earlobes started cracking open. When I’d fall

AJAHN SUMEDHO

asleep I’d have to pry my eyelids open; they’d be stuck shut 
with the stuff that comes out of your eyelids when you’re not 
feeling very well. Then one day a Canadian monk brought me 
three cans of tinned milk. In Asia there is tinned sweetened 
milk and it’s delicious. He also brought me some instant coffee 
and a flask of hot water. So I made a cup of this, put in a bit 
of coffee, poured in some of this milk, poured hot water and 
started drinking it. And I went crazy. It was so utterly delicious, 
the first time I’d had anything sweet in weeks, or anything 
stimulating. And being malnourished and in a very dull, tired, 
apathetic state, this was like high-octane petrol – whoomph! 
I gulped it down immediately, I couldn’t stop myself – and I 
managed to consume all three tins of milk and a good portion 
of that coffee. And my mind actually went flying into outer 
space, or it seemed like it, and I thought, ‘Maybe that’s the 
secret – if I can just get somebody to buy me tinned milk ...’
When I went to Wat Pah Pong the following year, I kept 
thinking, ‘Oh, I had all those wonderful experiences in Nong 
Khai. I had all those wonderful kinds of beautiful visions, and 
all those fantastic floating experiences and blazing insights, and 
it seemed I understood everything. And I even thought I was 
an arahant.’ So I just kept trying to do all the things I’d done 
in Nong Khai to get those results. But after a while even strong 
cups of coffee didn’t work any more. I didn’t seem to get those 
exhilarations, those fantastic highs and blazing insights that I 
had in the first year. So after the first Rains Retreat 4 at Wat Pah 
Pong, I thought: ‘This place is not for me. I think I’ll go and try 
to repeat what happened in Nong Khai.’ And I left Ajahn Chah 
4. The traditional three-month Rains Retreat is undertaken each year in Buddhist 
monasteries. It is generally a time of heightened attention to matters of training
and spiritual instruction.

THE W AY IT IS

and went to live on Phu Phek Mountain in Sakorn Nakorn 
Province. There at last I was in an idyllic spot. However, for 
the alms-round you had to leave before dawn and go down the 
mountain, which was quite a climb, and wait for the villagers 
to come. They’d bring you food, and then you had to climb all 
the way back up and eat this food before twelve noon. That was 
quite a problem.
I was with one other monk, a Thai monk, and I thought: 
‘He’s really very good’, and I was quite impressed with him. 
But when we were on this mountain, he wanted me to teach 
him English – so I was really angry with him and wanted to 
murder him. It was an area of North East Thailand where 
there were a lot of terrorists and communists. Sometimes 
helicopters flew overhead, checking us out. Once they came and 
took me down to the provincial town, wondering whether I
was a communist spy.
Then I became violently ill, so ill that they had to carry me down 
the mountain. I was stuck in a wretched place by a reservoir 
under a tin roof in the hot season, with insects buzzing in and 
out of my ears and orifices and horrible food. I nearly died, 
come to think of it. I almost didn’t make it. But it was during 
that time in that tin-roof lean-to that a real change took place. I 
was really despairing, sick and weak and totally depressed, and 
my mind would fall into hellish realms. With the terrible heat 
and discomfort, I felt I was being cooked; it was like torture.
Then a change came. Suddenly I just stopped my mind; I 
refused to get caught in that negativity and I started to practise 
ānāpānasati. I used the breath to concentrate my mind and 
things changed very quickly. After that I recovered my health

AJAHN SUMEDHO

and it was time to enter the next Rains Retreat, so I went back 
– I’d promised Ajahn Chah I’d go back to Wat Pah Pong for 
the Rains Retreat – and my robes were all tattered and torn and 
patched. I looked terrible. When Ajahn Chah saw me, he just 
burst out laughing. And I was so glad to get back after all that!
I had been trying to practise, and what I had wanted were the 
memories of those insights. I’d forgotten what the insights 
really were. I was so attached to the idea of working in some 
kind of ascetic way, like I did the first year when asceticism 
really worked. At that time being malnourished and being alone 
had seemed to provide me with insight, so that for the next few 
years I kept trying to create the conditions where I would be 
able to have those fantastic insights. But the following two or 
three years seemed to be years of just getting by. Nothing much 
seemed to happen. I was six months on that mountain before I 
returned to Wat Pah Pong, deciding just to stay on and follow 
the insights I had had.
One of the insights the first year was that I should find a teacher, 
and that I should learn how to live under a discipline imposed 
on me by that teacher. So I did that. I realized Ajahn Chah was 
a good teacher and had a good standard of monastic discipline, 
so I stayed with him. Those insights that I had were right, but 
I’d become attached to the memory of them.
People get very attached to all these special things like 
meditation retreats, and courses where everything is under 
control, everything is organized and there is total silence. Even 
though you do have insight then, reflection is not always there, 
because one assumes that to have those insights you need those 
conditions. Actually, insight is more and more a matter of

THE W AY IT IS

living insightfully. It’s not just that you have insight sometimes, 
but that more and more, as you reflect on Dhamma, everything 
is insightful. You see insightfully into life as it’s happening to 
you. As soon as you think you have to have special conditions 
for insight, but are not aware of that thought, you’ll create all 
sorts of complexities about your practice.
So I developed letting go, not concerning myself with attaining 
or achieving anything. I decided to make little achievements 
possible by learning to be a little more patient, a little more 
humble and a little more generous. I decided to develop in this 
way, rather than going out of my way to control and manipulate 
the environment with the intention of setting myself up in the 
hope of getting high. It became apparent through reflection that 
attachment to the insights was the problem. The insights were 
valid insights, but the problem was attachment to the memory 
of them. Then the insight came to let go of all insights; not to 
attach to them, just to keep letting go of all the insights one may 
have, because otherwise they become memories. Memories are 
conditions of the mind, and if you attach to them they can only 
take you to despair.
In each moment, it is as it is. With just one inhalation, at this 
moment, it’s this way. It’s not like yesterday’s inhalation. You’re 
not thinking of yesterday’s inhalation and exhalation while you 
inhale and exhale now. You’re with it completely as it is, so you 
establish that. The reflective ability is based on establishing 
your awareness in the way it is now, rather than having some 
idea of what you’d like to get and then trying to get it in the here 
and now. Trying to get yesterday’s blissful feeling in the here 
and now means you’re not aware of the way it is now. You’re 
not with it. Even if you’re doing ānāpānasati with the hope

AJAHN SUMEDHO

of getting the result that you had yesterday, that will make it 
impossible for that result to happen.
Once Venerable Vipassi was meditating in the shrine room 
and someone else was making quite distracting noises. Talking 
to him about it, I was quite impressed, because he said he 
first felt annoyed, but then decided the noises would be part 
of his practice. So he opened his mind to the meditation hall 
with everything in it – the noises, the silence, the whole thing. 
That’s wisdom. If the noise is something you can stop, like a 
door banging in the wind, then stop it, close the door. If it’s 
something you have control over, you can do that. But you have 
no control over much of life. You have no right to ask everything 
to be silent for ‘my’ meditation.
When there is reflection, instead of having a little mind that has 
to have total silence and special conditions, you have a big mind 
that can contain the whole of it: the noises, the disruptions, 
the silence, the bliss, the restlessness, the pain. The mind is allembracing, rather than specializing in a certain refinement of 
consciousness. Then you develop flexibility, because you can 
concentrate your mind. This is where wisdom is needed for real 
development. It’s through wisdom that we develop, not through 
willpower, or controlling or manipulating environmental 
conditions, getting rid of the things we don’t want and trying 
to set ourselves up so that we can follow this desire to achieve 
and attain.
Desire is insidious. When we are aware that our intention is to 
attain some state, that’s a desire, so we let it go. If we are sitting 
here with even a desire to attain the first jhāna, we recognize 
that this desire will be the very thing that will prevent its

THE W AY IT IS

fulfilment. So we let go of the desire, which doesn’t mean not 
doing ānāpānasati, but changing our attitude to it.
So what can we do now? Develop mindfulness of one 
inhalation. Most of us can do that; most human beings have 
enough concentration to be concentrated from the beginning 
of an inhalation to the end of it. But if your concentration span 
is so weak that you can’t even make it to the end, that’s all right. 
At least you can get to the middle, maybe. That’s better than if 
you gave up totally or never tried at all, because at least you’re 
composing the mind for one second and that’s the beginning: 
to learn to compose and collect the mind around one thing, like 
the breath, and sustain it just for the length of one inhalation; 
or if not, then half an inhalation, or a quarter, or whatever. At 
least you have started, and you must try to develop a mind that’s 
glad at just being able to do that much, rather than being critical 
because you haven’t attained the first jhāna, or the fourth.
If meditation becomes another thing you have to do and you feel 
guilty if you don’t live up to your resolutions, you start pushing 
yourself without an awareness of what you’re doing. Then life 
becomes quite dreary and depressing. But if you are putting a 
skilful kind of attention into your daily life, you’ll find much 
of daily life pleasant. That may not be so if you are caught in 
your compulsions and obsessions. Acting with compulsiveness 
becomes a burden, a grind, and we drag ourselves around doing 
what we have to do in a heedless and negative way.
However, we have this time for a retreat – we can sit and walk; we 
don’t have a lot to do. The morning and evening chanting can 
be extremely pleasant for us when we’re open to them. People 
are offering the food. The meal is quite a lovely thing. People

AJAHN SUMEDHO

are eating mindfully and quietly. When we’re doing things out 
of habit and compulsion, they become a drag; a lot of things 
which are quite pleasant in themselves are no longer pleasant. 
We can’t enjoy them when we’re coming from compulsiveness, 
heedlessness and ambition. Those are the kinds of driving 
forces that destroy the joy and the wonder of our lives.
Sustaining your attention on the breathing really develops 
awareness, but when you get lost in thought or restlessness, 
that’s all right too. Don’t drive yourself. Don’t be a slave driver 
or beat yourself with a whip and drive yourself in a nasty way. 
Lead, guide and train yourself; leading onwards, guide yourself 
rather than driving and forcing yourself. Nibbāna  is a subtle 
realization of non-grasping. You can’t drive yourself to nibbāna; 
that’s the sure way of never realizing it. It’s here and now, so if 
you’re driving yourself to nibbāna, you’re always going far away 
from it, driving right over it.
It’s pretty heavy sometimes to burn up attachments in our 
mind. The holy life is a holocaust, a total burning, a burning 
up of self, of ignorance. A diamond is a symbol of the purity 
that comes from the holocaust, something that went through 
such fires that what was left was purity. And so that’s why, in 
our life here, there has to be this willingness to burn away the 
self-views, the opinions, the desires, the restlessness, the greed 
– all of it, the whole of it, so that nothing but purity remains. 
Then when there is purity, there is nobody, no thing; there’s just 
‘that’, ‘suchness’. And let go of that. More and more the path 
is just simply being here and now, being with the way things 
are. There’s nowhere to go, nothing to do, nothing to become, 
nothing to get rid of. Because of the holocaust, there is no 
ignorance remaining, but only purity, clarity and intelligence.

THE W AY IT IS

15   |   STILLNESS AND RESPONSE
When we began our Winter Retreat, I asked you to accept the 
whole of what happens during the next two months. Make 
it your intention not just to have the kind of retreat that you 
would like, but to open yourself to the possibility of whatever 
arises. Psychologically, this prepares us for the way life moves 
and changes. When we set our mind on trying to make life into 
what we want, we always feel frustrated when it does not go 
quite the way we would like. So try changing your attitude to 
one of acceptance, and willingness to look at and understand 
experiences, rather than just trying to get rid of them.
You’re developing this practice of stillness, the stillness which 
is everywhere, whether you are in a group or alone. In order to 
be with the silence, we have to realize the stillness, the silence. 
In other words, be that way – be still and silent. If one just 
follows the restless sensations of the body and the proliferations 
of the mind, then of course silence is impossible. It can even 
be a threatening experience, because one is so identified with 
the agitation and restlessness of the sensory realm and endlessly 
seeking to be born into it.
The emphasis now is to recognize that restlessness for what 
it is, no longer to follow it, but to train oneself towards calm. 
This means not just suppressing or persecuting the bodily

AJAHN SUMEDHO

formation, but training it, because these bodies need to be 
trained with kindness. If you brutalize animals, they are not 
very nice. They are just frightened, untrustworthy, miserable 
creatures. T o train an animal does not mean you just pamper 
it, but that you guide it. It is the same with your own body. 
Your body needs to be respected and guided into not following 
its restless energy and habits. But this does not mean you 
should deny it everything, either. As a trainer you need to be 
both kind and firm, not stubborn or brutal. Not kind in the 
sense of giving in to everything, because that is not really being 
kind, but caring, being concerned, having the right amount of 
interest, the proper attitude towards your own body and mind.
How to calm the body? One way is through ‘sweeping 
meditation’, in which you ‘sweep’ your attention through the 
body, concentrating on the sensations in the body as you do 
so. The body needs to be noticed and accepted for what it is, 
so we bring into consciousness even the tensions, unpleasant 
sensations and sensation-less parts of the body. When we do 
that, going from the top of the head to the soles of the feet and 
back up again, the body will feel relaxed. It’s a very healthy 
meditation, and it will help to train the mind not to be caught 
up in conceptual proliferation and endless wandering.
Then as these forms start to calm down, we begin to feel much 
more aware of the silence of mind. We can abide more and more 
in that emptiness, where there is no self, just the present moment 
as it is. The stillness and silence are ever-present wherever we 
are, no matter what condition we happen to be in. You can 
abide in emptiness by just standing among the barren trees of 
winter and looking at them, without creating anything from 
them. You can feel a sense of perfect calm and contentment

THE W AY IT IS

with just being still and silent like the trees. Our ego might 
say, ‘Well I do not want to become like a tree. I want to express 
my true inner creativity, my unique personality.’ We listen to 
the inner voices that complain and grumble, the wanting to 
become something, that which stands out or exists. But we are 
not feeding these creatures, we are letting them go and moving 
towards the stillness, the silence.
This word ‘existence’ means ‘standing forth.’ Something that 
doesn’t exist doesn’t stand forth. So when we say ‘non-existing’, 
we are not talking about killing ourselves and no longer being 
alive, but about no longer following the desire to stand out to 
become something, to be separate. That sounds like a really 
nihilistic view: ‘ Ajahn Sumedho does not want to exist! Oh, 
poor man, needs to go to a psychiatrist.’ But non-existence 
does not mean we do not want to have any personalities, that 
we just want to become dreary, boring people. That is not it. It 
is the ability to abide in the subtlety of just being aware, open 
and sensitive, without being caught in the delusions of trying 
to become something else or stand out in some way. It is just 
realizing the peace of non-existence – because non-existence 
is peaceful. And when there are non-existence and emptiness, 
there is the knowing: brightness, wisdom, awareness, clarity, 
enlightenment. Things are as they are, suchness, as-is-ness.
In Western values the emphasis is on being special, a unique 
individual, a child of God. This attitude is very much supported 
by culture and religion. There are the ‘chosen people of God’, 
the sects which feel that they have been called by Jesus (and all 
the rest haven’t), and they are the ones who are going to make it 
and live in an eternal paradise. But what happens to you if you 
have all these views of being special, of being an individual, all

AJAHN SUMEDHO

those self-views? From my own experience, the result of all of 
this was suffering. There seemed to be a tremendous investment 
in having a unique and sizzling personality. Sometimes I 
used to think, ‘Wait a minute, maybe I don’t have a very nice 
personality. Maybe I don’t have any personality.’ There was so 
much anxiety, frustration, jealousy and fear. You didn’t want to 
be a failure, didn’t want to be a mediocrity, to be the ‘ordinary 
guy.’ It was very painful to be always caught in that desire to 
become somebody. And as long as you have that desire, you’re 
always going to fear you’ll become something that’s not very 
good, because fear and desire go together.
At first our Path may seem a bit hopeless. Sometimes a lifetime’s 
tendencies and habits towards becoming and emphasizing 
yourself as an individual personality are so strong that you feel 
you should not be that way – you should try to be nobody. 
But trying to be nobody is still being somebody. What I am 
suggesting is not to become nobody, but to realize the truth of 
mind. Then you can abide in Truth, where you feel most at ease 
and peaceful, rather than in this endless round of existence in 
which you’re always seeking to be reborn again. You’ll never 
find contentment in any level of existence. They never satisfy, 
not even the best of them. The most blissful conditioned states, 
the jhānas, are still unsatisfactory for us. The Buddha made 
it very clear that all forms of human happiness and worldly 
success are really terribly disappointing, because they can only 
gratify us temporarily. As soon as that gratification is gone, we 
are caught in the same process of again seeking to be reborn, to 
become something else, to find another moment of happiness. 
Life becomes so wearisome.

THE W AY IT IS

T o live in a body with the right attitude, begin to accept it as 
it is, with all that might be right and wrong in it, whether it is 
young or old, male or female, strong or weak. This is the path 
to true peacefulness. Do not seek to identify with your body 
or try to make it into something else. When we know Truth, 
we can pick up our identity as is appropriate to time and place, 
without this becoming an attachment. We feel we can manifest 
and disappear according to what is needed. I am not saying that 
we should just stand among the trees for the rest of one’s life. 
We can be something that is useful and helpful to others, but 
no longer as a permanent role we are trying to hold onto and 
defend. So we begin to feel a sense of freedom and ease.
When I was young I was very self-conscious – to say something 
in public was absolutely terrifying for me. Even when I was in the 
Navy, just having to raise my voice to say ‘ Aye aye, sir!’ in public 
in a roll- call would have me shaking from self-consciousness. 
Then I became a schoolteacher. Teaching eight- to nine-yearold Chinese kids in North Borneo for a couple of years wasn’t 
such a threat. But then becoming a monk in Thailand and 
eventually having to give talks to Thai people in Thai ...! All 
this self-consciousness became apparent. I’d get highs when 
I felt I’d given a good talk and everybody said: ‘You’re really 
good, Sumedho, you can give good Dhamma.’ Then sometimes 
I would give a really stupid talk and think: ‘I don’t want to give 
another talk ever again. I didn’t become a monk to give talks.’ 
But the idea was to keep watching this. Luang Por Chah5 would 
always encourage me to remain aware of the pride, the conceit, 
5. Luang Por: the Thai term translates as ‘V enerable Father’, although the English 
does not convey the mixture of affection and respect that it signifies. It is used in 
addressing an elderly monk.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

the embarrassment and self-consciousness that I would feel. 
And fortunately, in Thailand the people are such that they’re 
just grateful for a monk giving a talk. Even if it’s not a very good 
talk, that doesn’t seem to upset them very much. They still seem 
quite grateful for it. So that made it quite easy.
One time at a Kaṭhina 6 ceremony where we had to sit up all 
night, Ajahn Chah said: ‘Sumedho, you have to give a talk for 
three hours tonight.’ Up until then I’d only talked for half an 
hour. That was a strain, three hours! And he knew it. But with 
Ajahn Chah, I always felt that if he said something, I’d do it. So 
I sat up on the high seat and talked for three hours. And I had 
to sit there and watch people get up and leave; and I had to sit 
there and watch people just lie down on the floor and sleep in 
front of me. And at the end of the three hours, there were still a 
few polite old ladies sitting there!
That wasn’t Ajahn Chah saying, ‘OK Sumedho, go in there and 
bowl them over with some scintillating stuff. Entertain them, 
really sock it to them.’ I began to realize that what he wanted 
me to do was to be able to look at this self-consciousness, the 
posing, the pride, the conceit, the grumbling, the lazy, the 
‘not wanting to be bothered’ attitude, the wanting to please, 
to entertain, to win approval. All these have come up during 
these talks of the past fifteen years. But in meditation one 
feels more and more a real understanding of the suffering 
of a self-view. And then through that insight one realizes
the abiding in emptiness.
6. Kaṭhina: a ceremony held at the end of a Rains Retreat when laypeople
make offerings to the monastery.

THE W AY IT IS

Whenever Ajahn Chah used to give a talk, he’d sit and close 
his eyes, and then he’d start talking – and what would come 
out would be appropriate to the time and place. He said never 
to prepare a talk; he didn’t care if they were interesting or not, 
but just to let them come. And when there’s non-existence, no 
self anymore, and we give a talk, there are none of the problems 
we build out of: ‘What do people think of me? What do people 
say about me?’ Or defiance: ‘They can think what they want, I 
don’t care!’ (But you do really, otherwise you wouldn’t have to 
say that, would you?).
Sometimes personalities manifest at the appropriate times. As 
you talk, you manifest your personality. Maybe in your own 
mind you are still caught up in being a person. But this is merely 
conditions that arise and cease, and come out of fear and desire. 
When there is emptiness, personality still operates – it does not 
mean that we are exactly the same, like bees in a hive. There 
are still the myriad differences of character and personality that 
can manifest as charming or whatever. But there is no delusion 
about them – there is no suffering.
For example, when Ajahn Chah first visited England, he was 
invited to a certain woman’s home for a vegetarian meal. 
She obviously had put a lot of effort into creating the most 
delicious kinds of food. She was bustling about, offering this 
food and looking very enthusiastic. Ajahn Chah was sitting 
there assessing the situation, and then suddenly he said, ‘This 
is the most delicious and wonderful meal I have ever had!’ That 
comment was really something, because in Thailand monks 
are not supposed to comment on the food. And yet Luang Por 
suddenly manifested this charming character, complimenting 
a woman who needed to be complimented because that made

AJAHN SUMEDHO

her feel happy. He had a feeling for the time and place, for the 
person he was with, for what would be kind. So he could step 
out of the designated role of what is supposed to be according 
to a tradition, and manifest in ways that were appropriate. That 
shows wisdom and the ability to respond to a situation; not to 
be just rigidly bound within a convention that blinds you. That 
was a manifestation, and also a disappearance, because I have 
never heard of his doing that again.
The empty mind is an abiding in ease, where there is no self, 
no fear or desire to be deluded with. And yet there is the ability 
to respond out of compassion and kindness to the present 
situation in a suitable way. It is strange, isn’t it? Compare the goal 
of nibbāna, of non-existence, with that of becoming the best 
person in the whole world, the strongest or the most beautiful. 
Worldly values are about having power, beauty, wealth – but 
they all have their opposites. Success is always attached to 
failure, happiness is always attached to unhappiness, praise is 
always attached to blame, good fortune to bad fortune. So if 
you choose the worldly values of wealth, power, success and 
praise, you are going to get their opposites along with them, 
because they are like two sides of the same coin. You can’t 
separate the one from the other. Worldly values are never really 
going to allow you to feel at ease.
The world is an unsafe place, it’s not peaceful. And it’s not 
where we really belong. You only begin to understand and 
realize peace through emptiness, non-existence, not-self. And 
this is not annihilation, but enlightenment, freedom, true 
peace, true knowledge.

THE W AY IT IS

16   |   REFLECTIONS ON
SHARING BLESSINGS
Now let us chant the verses of sharing and aspiration.
Through the goodness that arises from my practice,
May my spiritual teachers and guides of great virtue,
My mother, my father and my relatives,
The sun and the moon,
And all virtuous leaders of the world –
May the highest gods and evil forces;
Celestial beings, guardian spirits of the Earth,
And the Lord of Death;
May those who are friendly, indifferent or hostile;
May all beings receive the blessings of my life.
May they soon attain the threefold bliss
And realize the Deathless.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Through the goodness that arises from my practice,
And through this act of sharing,
May all craving and attachments quickly cease
And all harmful states of mind.
Until I realize nibbāna, in every kind of birth,
May I have an upright mind
With mindfulness and wisdom, austerity and vigour.
May the forces of delusion not take hold
Nor weaken my resolve.
The Buddha is my excellent refuge,
Unsurpassed is the protection of the Dhamma,
The Solitary Buddha is my noble guide,
The Sangha is my supreme support. 
Through the supreme power of all these,
May darkness and delusion be dispelled.

THE W AY IT IS

17   |   TURNING TOW ARDS
EMPTINESS
By reflecting, you bring into consciousness the state of 
conditions as they happen to be now. Having been born, we’re 
now this age, feeling this way, at this time and in this place. 
That’s the way it is. That cannot be changed by us. It’s just the 
inevitability of birth that this is the way it is now. And when 
you realize this, you have a perspective on the way it is – rather 
than a reaction to the way it is. If you don’t reflect, you just react 
to the way it is.
If you’re feeling happy, you get high, ‘I want to be a monk for the 
rest of my life and devote myself to the Dhamma. Dhamma is 
the way for me, the only way, the true way’; and you go out and 
bore people with a harangue on the importance of Buddhism 
in the world because you’re high and you feel positive and 
confident. Even that feeling of being inspired and confident 
and full of faith and devotion and all those kinds of things – 
that’s the way it is. One can feel a lot of faith, confidence in what 
one is doing. Or one can feel the opposite: one loses faith, one 
feels that this is a waste of time: ‘I’ve wasted my life. It’s of no 
value, I haven’t got anywhere. It hasn’t done anything for me. I 
don’t believe in it anymore, I’m fed up with it.’ Or one can feel 
indifference: ‘It’s all right, don’t know what else to do. Better

AJAHN SUMEDHO

than working in a factory.’ Whichever way you’re feeling now, 
either extreme or just indifference, that’s the way it is.
So just notice when you’re feeling positive and tremendously 
energetic, or when there’s a lack of energy and you’re too 
critical. When you’re depressed, tired or not feeling very well, 
it’s hard to arouse the inspired feeling. In those circumstances 
you tend to pick up what’s wrong with things very quickly. 
The way somebody walks across a room can really irritate you. 
Somebody blows their nose too hard, and oh, that’s disgusting! 
But when you are feeling full of inspiration and devotion, you 
don’t care about the faults of this or that, you’re caught up in 
this feeling of devotion and faith. These perceptions are to be 
reflected on as the way it is now. It has to be this way because it 
can’t be any other way at this moment. We feel like this, we feel 
tired or invigorated or whatever – this is the way it is. These are 
the results of having been born and living our lives, and being 
subject to changing conditions of sensuality.
Then note, really note what you add to the existing conditions. 
In all-night sittings you may feel sleepy or tired; note what 
you add to that feeling. Note the feeling itself but maintain a 
posture, rather than just react to feeling tired from an attempt 
to annihilate the feeling by following it and sinking into 
lethargy. When you’re convinced that you’re so tired there’s 
really nothing you can do about it, and even pulling your body 
straight is something that seems totally impossible, hold it up 
straight for a length of time. Observe, and learn how much 
energy it takes to hold a body up.
How much energy does it take to stop the thinking process? 
Have you ever noticed that? ‘Just can’t stop thinking’ – the

THE W AY IT IS

mind goes on and on. ‘Can’t stop, what can I do? I don’t know 
how to stop thinking – it keeps going. I can’t stop it ...’ I know 
about this because I’ve always had a problem with a mind that 
just seemed to be endlessly thinking about something. And the 
desire to stop thinking and the effort to get rid of it create the 
conditions for more thinking. It takes effort to do this, not just 
thinking about doing it.
I remember an Australian Abhidhamma fanatic once came 
to Wat Pah Pong. This man had a mission – when Westerners 
get into Abhidhamma they become like born-again Christians 
– but he didn’t know how to meditate; he didn’t believe 
that meditation worked, and he figured it all out with his 
Abhidhamma concepts. He felt that you couldn’t stop thinking. 
He said: ‘You’re always thinking and you can’t stop thinking.’ 
I said: ‘But you can stop thinking’, and he said: ‘No, you can’t’; 
and I said, ‘I’ve just stopped thinking’, and he said: ‘No, you 
haven’t!’ It was pointless to go on talking to someone like that. 
You have to be alert to know when you are not thinking, so 
you take an actual thought like ‘I can’t stop thinking’, and 
you deliberately think that. This is what I did, because I was a 
habitual, obsessive thinker.
So if you are averse to thinking, instead of trying to stop, go to 
the other extreme and deliberately think something; and watch 
yourself deliberately thinking, so that it’s not just a wandering 
thought process in which your mind goes round and round in 
circles. Use your wisdom faculty: deliberately think something, 
some thought that is completely neutral and uninteresting, like 
‘I am a human being.’ Deliberately think it, but observe the 
space before you’re thinking, and then deliberately say: ‘I am a 
human being.’ Then note the end of the thought, the moment

AJAHN SUMEDHO

when you stop thinking. Pay attention to the moments before 
and after the thought, rather than to the thought itself; just hold 
attention on where there is no thought. Investigate the space 
around the thought, the space where the thought comes and 
goes, rather than thinking. Then you’ll be aware of an empty 
mind, where there’s just awareness but no thought.
That may last for just a second, because you start grasping, so 
you just have to keep being more aware by thinking something 
again. With practice you can use even very unpleasant thoughts. 
For example, you might have strong emotional feelings of, 
‘I’m no good, I’m worthless’, and they can be an obsession. In 
some people’s minds they can become a background to their 
lives. So you try thinking: ‘I shouldn’t think that. Venerable 
Sumedho says I’m good. But I know I’m no good.’ However, 
if you take that obsession and use it as a conscious thought: 
‘I am no good’, you start seeing the space around it, and it no 
longer sounds so absolute. When it becomes obsessive it sounds 
absolute, infallible; the honest truth, the real truth: ‘This is 
what I really am, I’m no good.’ But when you take it out of the 
context of obsession and think it deliberately, intentionally,
you see it objectively.
That sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ is just a habit of the mind; it’s 
not the truth. If you really take the ‘I/I am’ and look at it 
objectively, the feeling created by that ‘I am’ and ‘I am this way’ 
or ‘I should be/should not be’ is very different from when you’re 
just reacting.
In contemplating the Four Noble Truths you have the truth of 
suffering, its arising, its cessation and then the Path. You can’t 
know the Path and the way out of suffering until you are aware

THE W AY IT IS

of where everything ceases – in the mind itself. The mind is still 
vital and alert even when there is no thought in it; but if you 
don’t notice that, you believe you are always thinking. That’s 
the way it seems. You only conceive of yourself when you’re 
thinking, because you’re identified with memory and the sense 
of ‘I am’ or ‘I am not.’ That ‘yourself ’ is very much a conditioned, 
programmed perception in the mind. As long as you believe in 
that perception and never question it, you will always believe 
that you are an obsessive thinker, and you shouldn’t be this way 
or shouldn’t feel that way and you shouldn’t worry – but you 
do, and you’re a hopeless case; and so it goes on from one thing 
to another.
So ‘I am’ is just a perception, really – it arises in the mind and 
it ceases in the mind. When it ceases, note that cessation of 
thought. Make that cessation, that empty mind, a ‘sign’ rather 
than just creating more things in the emptiness. You can get 
refined states of consciousness by fixing on refined objects, as in 
samatha meditation practices that emphasize calming the mind 
– but with the contemplation of the Noble Truths you’re using 
the wisdom faculty to note where everything ceases. And yet 
when the mind is empty, the senses are still all right.
It’s not like being in a trance, totally oblivious to everything; 
your mind is open, empty – or you might call it whole, complete, 
bright. Then you can take anything, like a fearful thought – 
you can take it, deliberately think it and see it as just another 
condition of the mind rather than a psychological problem. It 
arises, it ceases; there’s nothing in it, nothing in any thought. 
It’s just a movement in the mind and therefore it’s not a person. 
You make it personal by attaching to it, believing it: ‘ And I’m 
such a hopeless case. I know I can never be enlightened after all

AJAHN SUMEDHO

the things I’ve done; the stupid things. And I’m so selfish and 
I’ve made so many mistakes. I know there’s no hope for me.’ All 
that arises and ceases in the mind!
Believing is grasping, isn’t it? – ‘I know what I am and I know 
I’m no good.’ You believe that, and that’s what grasping is. You 
create that belief, so the mind goes on in that way. And you 
can find all kinds of proof that you’re no good – you can even 
start getting paranoid: ‘Everybody knows that I’m no good, 
too. Yesterday Ven. Sucitto walked by and I just knew that he 
knows I’m no good. Then this morning I came into the hall and 
Sister Rocana looked at me a little bit strangely – she knows!’ 
Through belief you can see and interpret everything that 
people do in a personal way, as if they’ve all been condemning 
and judging you. That’s paranoia.
Even the most beautiful thoughts and aspirations, as well as the 
most evil and nasty ones, arise and cease in the mind. Don’t 
misunderstand me; I’m not saying good and evil thoughts are 
the same. They have the same characteristic of arising and 
ceasing, that’s all. In other respects they’re different. Good 
thoughts are good thoughts, evil thoughts are evil thoughts. 
So I’m not saying it’s all right to think evil thoughts, but I am 
pointing beyond the quality of the thought: love and hate arise 
and cease in the mind.
In this perspective you’re going to the reflective mind, where 
most people are totally unaware. People are generally only 
aware of themselves as a personality, an emotion or a thought 
– in other words, as a condition. For practice, don’t worry 
about the qualities that go through the mind, how wonderful, 
interesting, beautiful, ugly, nasty or neutral they might be.

THE W AY IT IS

We’re not investigating qualities or denying the quality of any 
thought, but just noting the way it is. Then you leave it alone 
so that it ceases. You create a thought, deliberately put it into 
the mind and let it go. T o let go doesn’t mean you push it away: 
you leave the thought alone, though you’re aware of it during 
the whole time: the moment before the thought, the interstices
and the ending.
We don’t notice the space around thought very much. It is just 
like the space in this room, I have to call your attention to it. 
What does it take to be aware of the space in this room? You 
have to be alert. With the objects in the room you don’t have 
to be alert, you can just be attracted or repelled: ‘I don’t like 
that, I like this.’ You can just react to the quality of beauty and 
ugliness, whether it pleases or displeases you. That’s our habit 
– our life tends to be reaction to pleasure and pain, beauty and 
ugliness. We see beauty and we say, ‘Oh, look at that! Isn’t it 
absolutely fantastic?’ or we think ‘Oh, disgusting!’ But the 
beautiful objects and the ugly ones are all in space, and to 
notice space you withdraw your attention from the beautiful 
and ugly objects.
Of course they’re still there; you needn’t throw them out, you 
don’t have to tear down the building so that we can have a space 
here. But if you don’t concentrate on what’s in that room with 
love or hate, if you don’t make anything out of it, your attention 
withdraws from the objects and you notice the space. So we 
have a perspective on space in a room like this.
You can reflect on that. Anyone can come and go in this space. 
The most beautiful, the most ugly, saint and sinner, can come 
and go in this space, and the space is never harmed, ruined

AJAHN SUMEDHO

or destroyed by the objects that come and go in it. The mind 
works on the same principle. But if you’re not used to seeing the 
spaciousness of your mind, you are not aware of the space that 
the mind really is. So you’re unaware of the emptiness of the 
mind, because you’re always attached to an idea or an opinion 
or mood.
With insight meditation you’re reflecting on the five khandhā – 
on the body, rūpa; feelings, vedanā; perception, saññā ; mental 
formations, saṅkhārā; and sense-consciousness, viññāṇa . We 
may want to get rid of them, but that is another condition, 
another saṅkhāra that we create. So we investigate them until 
they no longer delude us, and allow them to cease in the empty 
mind. When you think, ‘My body’s still here – how does it 
cease? It’s still here, isn’t it?’ Consider that the body will live 
its life span; it has been born, and it will disappear when its 
kammic force ends. What happened to Napoleon? What 
happened to the Queen of Sheba? And Confucius and Lao 
Tzu, and Marie Antoinette, Beethoven and Bach? They’re 
memories in our minds; they’re just perceptions in people’s 
minds now. But that’s all they ever were anyway, even when
their bodies were alive.
‘Venerable Sumedho’ is a perception in the mind – in my 
mind it’s a perception, in your mind it’s a perception. Right 
now the perception of it is: ‘Venerable Sumedho is alive and 
kicking.’ When the body dies, the perception changes to: 
‘Venerable Sumedho is dead.’ That’s all. The perception of 
death is there along with the name ‘Sumedho’, where now it is
alive and kicking.

THE W AY IT IS

So as you experience it, the body is a perception that arises and 
ceases in the empty mind. With this realization of the empty 
mind, you can develop the Eightfold Path very skilfully. The 
Eightfold Path is based on right understanding, and that is the 
understanding of cessation.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

  BEYOND BELIEF   |   1 4 
From the appearance of the five khandhā – rūpa, vedanā, saññā, 
saṅkhārā and viññāṇa – and the unquestioned belief that they 
are oneself – it always seems that the mind is in the body. If 
you say, ‘Where’s your mind?’, most people will point to their 
head or their hearts. But if you investigate the way things are, 
following the teachings of the Buddha, you begin to realize that 
the body is in the mind. Mind is really what comes first – the 
body is just the receptor. It’s a sensitive receptor like a radio or 
radar, or something similar. It’s not a person, it’s not anything 
other than merely an instrument.
When that view of being within the five khandhā is seen 
through and let go of, there’s a realization of what we can 
call ‘deathlessness’, immortality. These words imply ‘beyond 
the conditioned’, and the ability to conceive the Deathless is 
impossible. You can point at a word like ‘Deathless’, ‘immortal’ 
or ‘Unconditioned’, but beyond that there’s no more you can say 
about it, because words themselves are conditioned, and mortal. 
Words, concepts, perceptions, conceptions are only appropriate 
to the conditioned world. As long as you’re attached to thoughts 
and concepts, to views and opinions, no matter how intelligent 
and altruistic those views might be, that very attachment will 
bind you to the conditioned realm – you will keep being reborn

THE W AY IT IS

into it. You will keep searching for the Unconditioned in the 
conditioned, looking for God in the mortal condition, in the 
changing nature of sensory consciousness, only to feel totally 
frustrated and disappointed. Then you have to support that 
‘soul view’ by a kind of stubborn belief.
Beliefs don’t change. When you are fifty, you can believe in 
exactly the same things you believed in when you were five. 
That belief is the grasping of a perception. Some beliefs are very 
nice and pretty and sentimental. The romantic and sentimental 
view of life presents a pretty picture that we can still believe in 
even when we’re eighty. When my Gran died at seventy-five, she 
still had a sixteen-year-old girl’s emotional development. When 
she died she had a boyfriend called Hercules Cavalier who was 
her gigolo. She still had the same kind of romantic longings as 
when she was a sixteen-year-old girl. Even though at seventy-five 
she was a physical wreck, her mind was still attached to those 
pretty pictures of youth.
We assume and believe, and never question the prejudice and 
fixed views we’re grasping, that we never change. They don’t 
change; we keep reaffirming the same old things over and 
over again. That’s why so many political problems arise: it’s 
because so many people hold on to political views, rather than 
trying to be aware of the needs of a particular time and place. 
How much violence, meanness and nastiness are done in the 
name of property alone! And boundaries: ‘This is my land, 
get off my land.’ You see it all the time in countries’ endless 
border problems. And the meanness of heart, not wanting 
to let people in or let them out, because of the unquestioned 
belief, ‘This is my house/my family/my wife/my husband/my
children, my, my, my ...’

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Over the course of many years of meditation, I can see that a 
lot of attachments, obsessions and tendencies have fallen away 
because of allowing things to cease. The process has been 
one of letting things go, rather than believing, grasping, and 
becoming reborn in endless thought patterns and desires.
When we view life as just a passage, we are not going to hang 
on to it. We’re not going to become mean and selfish, because 
we realize that nothing is worth holding on to – not material 
wealth, property, status, worldly values, or anything else. 
Nothing is worth bothering with that much, because it is not 
really ours anyway. Of course, we can believe that it’s ours.
But in actual investigation, in looking into the way the mind 
actually is, we see that nothing really belongs to us anyway, and 
there’s nobody to own anything. With the reflection that the 
body is in the mind, this grasping changes. You have to start 
contemplating, ‘What is mind, then?’ – because your body’s 
certainly not in your brain. Nor is your blood-pumping heart. 
They’re in your body.
This evening I was standing outside and looking at the dusk, 
and the trees, the barren trees on the borders of Amaravati; just 
contemplating that the trees are in the mind and that trees are 
conscious. There’s a certain level of consciousness in all life, in 
the fact that there is receptivity to the environment, and trees 
are very receptive to the environment they are in. This leads 
to beginning to change the perception of mind to that of a 
consciousness that pervades everything. Then it’s not just a 
human mind, there’s something more to it. But in Buddhism it 
is never named, you never try to form a concept about it.

THE W AY IT IS

Instead you contemplate the totality, the whole of sensitivity, 
the sensory realm and what it is really about. And we have to 
contemplate this from our own ability to be conscious and to 
feel, but not see it in terms of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ – ‘I feel these 
things, but nobody else does’; or ‘Only human beings do, and 
animals don’t’; or ‘Only mammals do, and reptiles don’t’; or 
‘Only the animal and insect kingdoms do but not plants.’
Consciousness does not imply thought, but it does imply 
receptivity to what is impinging, to what comes to it. We begin 
to see that consciousness is a vital, changing universal system. 
It’s like a plenum, it’s full with all possibilities, all potentials of 
form, of what can be created. We can see whatever we can think 
of in terms of the human ability to imagine, through which 
we can create all kinds of fantasies that come into material 
form. But the greatest, most profound and meaningful human 
potential is overlooked by most people. This is the ability to 
understand the truth of the way it is, to see the Dhamma, to be 
free from all delusions.
When you are contemplating reality, begin to reflect on where 
there is no self. Whenever there is the cessation of self, there are 
just clarity, knowing, and contentment – you feel at ease and 
balanced. It takes a while to be able to give up all the striving 
tendencies and the restless tendencies of the body and mind. 
But for some moments they will cease, and then there’s a real 
clarity, contented peacefulness. And also there is no self, no 
‘me’ and ‘my’ in that. You can contemplate that.
We must recognize that we have to learn through being totally 
humbled, by never succeeding at anything we are doing in 
this meditation, never being successful, never getting what we

AJAHN SUMEDHO

want – and if we do get what we want, we lose it right away. 
We have to be totally humbled, to the point where any form 
of self-view is relinquished willingly, graciously, humbly. 
That’s why the more that meditation comes from willpower 
based on a self-view, and on ‘me’ achieving and attaining, the 
more you can expect only failure and despair, because this is
not a worldly pursuit.
In worldly situations, if you are clever and strong, gifted and have 
opportunities, and if the conditions are there, you can barge 
your way through and become a great success. The survival of 
the fittest means you can manage to get on top and destroy the 
competition – you can be a winner. But on the worldly plane 
even a winner is still going to be a failure, because if you win 
something you are going to lose something too. Winning and 
losing go together. So winning is never as wonderful as it might 
look, it is the anticipation of winning. If you’ve actually won 
something – so what? You have a moment of elation, maybe – 
‘I’m a winner!’ – but then it’s, ‘Now what do I do? What do I 
have to win next?’
Winning, worldly goals and worldly values are not really going to 
satisfy us, so if we apply that same attitude towards the religious 
life it’s clearly not going to work. We will just feel a sense of 
total despair, helplessness. And we need that, we need to lose 
everything, to let go of everything: all hope, all expectations, all 
demands, to be able just to be with the way things are, and not 
expect or demand them to be otherwise.
The practice of the Buddha is to accept life as it is. This is the 
way it is. Our reflection as mendicants is that we have enough 
to eat, robes to wear, a roof over our heads and medicine for

THE W AY IT IS

illness. The Dhamma and Vinaya are taught. That is good 
enough, so we begin to say, ‘It’s all right, I’m content’, and not 
make problems or dwell on the irritations and frustrations that 
we find here. I find myself much more at ease now with letting 
life be as it is here in Amaravati, and with the way things are – 
with the weather, the people, the country. Not comparing, not 
judging, but being grateful for the opportunity and accepting 
of whatever is. And it isn’t all that easy, believe me, because I 
can be quite critical too, and fussy. There’s also a strong sense 
of responsibility in wanting to make things right, and work 
properly – not just wanting nice things for myself, but wanting 
to make everything right and good for everyone else. I can be 
really caught up with responsibility. Being an Ajahn and an 
Abbot and all that, you try to set a good example. You become 
obsessed with it. I always felt I had to be a kind of cardboard 
monk, a plastic Sumedho Bhikkhu. If you saw anything other 
than my perfect smile and stereotyped presence, you’d lose all 
faith in the Dhamma!
But we begin to let go of that, even the altruistic tendencies of 
feeling responsible. That doesn’t mean one is irresponsible, but 
one is letting go of those ideas, those views that can so blind 
us. They might be very good views, but if you grasp them you 
can’t get beyond them. In living the holy life you train yourself 
to be open and willing to learn from the ups and downs and 
the way things happen to be – the irritations and problems of 
community life, and the way things are – rather than resisting, 
avoiding and rejecting life. You give up controlling and 
manipulating, and trying to change the world and make it into 
what you want it to be. One has to give up, let go of that kind of 
inclination, and abide in the knowing, in mindfulness.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

In practice, just notice if you’re trying too hard. If you have the 
view that you must stay awake, that can make you compulsive, 
the ‘I have to stay awake’ compulsion. Notice if you attach 
to either extreme, like ‘I have to stay awake’, or ‘It doesn’t 
matter.’ You can use one to counterbalance the other. If you 
tend to think: ‘It doesn’t matter’, you need to practise ‘I must 
stay awake’, but if you’re caught in the ‘I must stay awake’ 
compulsion, you can say: ‘It doesn’t matter, let go.’ Neither one 
is a fixed position, they’re just skilful means to find the middle, 
the place of balance. You don’t come in here and say: ‘It doesn’t 
matter, let go, that’s my practice’ and then fall over asleep, 
because it doesn’t matter – ‘It’s all Dhamma, sleeping Buddha, 
awake Buddha.’ Or there’s the compulsive, ‘I don’t want to 
fall asleep, it matters so much to stay awake! Ajahn Sumedho 
says: “You come here to be awake, not to fall asleep”’– so then 
one can become caught in the compulsion to be awake. The 
knowing here is the knowing of what’s driving us, what we’re 
attached to, where that attachment is; and it does take patience 
to see it and to acknowledge it.
One of the supports for enlightenment is devotion, a kind 
of emotional sweetness and joyfulness. We tend to want 
everything on the level of intellectual concepts, but we also 
need to humble ourselves to the joy and sweetness of loving the 
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, especially if we find our 
practice is getting a bit dried up.
This is to advise you not to be frightened of loving and joy, and 
open-hearted generosity. Human life without this is a dreary 
desert, just like living in some antiquarian museum. It’s all nice 
and clean with marble corridors, but cold, ordered, catalogued. 
In museums everything is dusted and put in order, but it’s cold.

THE W AY IT IS

Religion also gives us this opportunity for warmth, joy, love, 
devotion, offering, giving. They are very much a foundation and 
a necessity for religious life. See our life here in the community 
as an opportunity to manifest generosity, love and joy, not just 
as an obsession with looking at our citta 7 to see what is moving 
through it at this moment, seeing that it’s anicca, dukkha, 
anattā. We do that in order to reflect on the way things are, to 
be free from illusions or attachments to love and generosity – 
because if you attach to concepts of love and generosity, that 
will also bring you to despair.
For this retreat the laypeople have come to give, to help our 
sangha-community. This is their act of love and generosity, and 
our appreciation for that act of generosity is our determination 
to practise, to realize the Dhamma, so that our lives will bless 
the lay community in a skilful and wholesome relationship. We 
can reflect on it in this way, not to take the situation for granted 
in any way whatsoever, but to allow space for the joy and the 
gratitude we feel. These qualities help provide the foundation 
for our own understanding of freedom from delusion. 
7. citta: the centre of mental consciousness; also ‘heart’ or ‘mind’.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

BEING NOBODY   |   19
Try to note the cessation or the ending of things in little ways 
by paying special attention to the ending of the out-breath. 
This way, in your daily life, you’ll notice the ordinary endings 
to which no one ever pays attention. I’ve found this practice 
very useful because it’s a way of noticing the changing nature 
of the conditioned realm as one is living one’s daily life. As I 
understand it, it was to these ordinary states of mind that 
the Buddha was pointing, not the special highly developed 
concentrated states.
The first year that I practised I was on my own, and I could 
get into highly developed concentrated states of mind, which 
I really enjoyed. Then I went to Wat Pah Pong, where the 
emphasis was on the way of life in accordance with Vinaya- 
discipline and routine. There one always had to go out on 
alms-round every morning, and do the morning and evening 
chanting. If you were young and healthy, you were expected 
to go on these very long alms-rounds – they had shorter ones 
that the old, feeble monks could go on. In those days I was very 
vigorous, so I was always going on these long, long alms- rounds 
and I’d come back tired; then there would be the meal, and then 
in the afternoon we all had chores to do. It was not possible 
under those conditions to stay in a concentrated state. Most of 
the day was taken up by daily life routine.

THE W AY IT IS

I got fed up with all this, and went to see Luang Por Chah and 
said: ‘I can’t meditate here’; and he started laughing at me and 
telling everyone, ‘Sumedho can’t meditate here!’ I was seeing 
meditation as this very special experience that I’d had and 
quite enjoyed, but Luang Por Chah was obviously pointing to 
the ordinariness of daily life: getting up, the alms-rounds, the 
routine work, the chores; the whole thing was for mindfulness. 
And he didn’t seem at all eager to support me in my desire to 
have strong sensory deprivation experiences by not having to 
do all these little daily tasks. He didn’t seem to go along with 
that, so I ended up having to conform and learn to meditate in 
the ordinariness of daily life. And in the long run that has been 
most helpful.
It has not always been what I wanted, because one wants the 
special. One would love to have blazing light and marvellous 
insights in technicolour, and incredible bliss and ecstasy and 
rapture – not just be happy and calm, but over the moon! But 
if you reflect on life in this human form, it is just like this. It’s 
being able to sit peacefully, get up peacefully and be content 
with what you have; it’s that which makes our life as a daily 
experience something that is joyful and not suffering. And this 
is how most of our life can be lived – you can’t live in ecstatic 
states of rapture and bliss and do the dishes.
I used to read about the lives of saints who were so caught up 
in ecstasies they couldn’t do anything on any practical level. 
The blood would flow from their palms and they could do feats 
that the faithful would rush to look at, but when it came to 
anything practical or realistic they were quite incapable.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

And yet when you contemplate the Vinaya-discipline itself, it is 
a training in being mindful. It’s about mindfulness with regard 
to making robes, collecting alms-food, eating food, taking 
care of your kuti, what to do in this situation or that situation. 
It’s all very practical advice about the daily life of a bhikkhu. 
An ordinary day in the life of Bhikkhu Sumedho isn’t about 
exploding into rapture, but about getting up and going to the 
toilet, bathing and putting on a robe, and doing this or that; it’s 
just about being mindful while one is living in this form and 
learning to awaken to the way things are, to the Dhamma.
That’s why, whenever we contemplate cessation, we’re not 
looking for the end of the universe but just the exhalation of 
the breath, or the end of the day, or the end of the thought, or 
the end of the feeling. T o notice them means that we have to 
pay attention to the flow of life – we have to really notice the 
way it is, rather than wait for some kind of fantastic experience 
of marvellous light descending on us, zapping us, or whatever.
Just contemplate the ordinary breathing of your body. You 
may notice that if you’re inhaling, it’s easy to concentrate. 
When you’re filling your lungs, you feel a sense of growth, 
development and strength. When you say somebody’s ‘puffed 
up’, they’re probably inhaling. It’s hard to feel puffed up while 
you’re exhaling. Expand your chest and you have a sense of being 
somebody big and powerful. However, when I first started 
paying attention to exhaling my mind would wander. Exhaling 
didn’t seem as important as inhaling – I was just doing it so that 
I could get on to the next inhalation.
Now reflect: one can observe breathing, so what is it that can 
observe? What is it that observes and knows the inhalation and

THE W AY IT IS

the exhalation? It’s not the breathing, is it? You can also observe 
the panic that comes if you want to catch a breath and you 
can’t; but the observer, that which knows, is not an emotion, 
not panic-stricken, is not an exhalation or an inhalation. So 
our refuge in Buddha is being that knowing; being the witness 
rather than the emotion, the breath or the body.
With the sound of silence, some people hear fluctuations of 
sound or a continuous background of sound. So you can con -
template it, you notice that. Can you notice it if you put your 
fingers in your ears? Can you hear it in a place where they are using the chainsaw, or when you’re doing exercises, or when you’re 
in a fraught emotional state? You’re using this sound of silence 
as something to remember to turn to and notice, because it’s 
always present here and now. And there’s that which notices it.
There is the desire of the mind to call it something, to have a 
name for it, have it listed as some kind of attainment or project 
something on to it. Notice that, the tendency to want to make it 
into something. It has been said that it’s probably just the sound 
of your blood circulating in your ears. Somebody else called it 
the cosmic sound, the bridge to the Divine – that sounds nicer 
than ‘the blood in your ears.’ It might be the sound of the 
cosmos, or you might have an ear disease. But it doesn’t have to 
be anything; it’s what it is, it’s ‘as that.’ Whatever it is, it can be 
used as reflection, because when you’re with it there is no sense 
of self; there is mindfulness, there is the ability to reflect. So it 
is more like a straight edge that you can go to, to keep you from 
wobbling. It is something you can use to compose yourself in 
daily life, when you’re getting dressed, brushing your teeth, 
closing a door, coming into the meditation hall, sitting down. 
So much of daily life is just habitual, because we focus on what

AJAHN SUMEDHO

we consider to be the important things of life – like meditation. 
So walking from where you live to the meditation hall can be a 
totally heedless experience, just a habit – clump, clump, clump! 
Then slam! goes the door! After which you sit here for an hour 
trying to be mindful!
But you can begin to see a way of being mindful, of bringing 
mindfulness to the ordinary routines and experiences of life. I 
have a nice little picture in my room of which I’m very fond, of 
an old man with a coffee mug in his hand, looking out of the 
window into an English garden with the rain coming down. 
The title of the picture is ‘Waiting.’ That’s how I think of 
myself: an old man sitting at the window with my coffee mug, 
waiting, waiting, watching the rain or the sun, or whatever.
I don’t find that a depressing image, but rather a peaceful one. 
This life is just about waiting – we’re waiting all the time, 
so we notice that. We can be just waiting, not waiting for 
anything but just waiting. And then we respond to the things 
of life: to the time of day, the duties, the way things move and 
change, the society we are in. That response isn’t from the 
force of habits of greed, hatred and delusion but a response of
wisdom and mindfulness.
How many of you feel you have a mission in life to perform, 
something you’ve got to do, some kind of important task that’s 
been assigned to you by God, or fate, or something? People 
frequently get caught up in that view of being somebody who 
has a mission. Who can be just with the way things are, so that 
it is just the body that grows up, breathes and is conscious, gets 
old and dies? We can practise, live within the moral precepts, 
do good, respond to the needs and experiences of life with

THE W AY IT IS

mindfulness and wisdom – but there’s nobody who has to 
do anything. There’s nobody with a mission, nobody special; 
we’re not making a person or a saint, an avatar or a tulku , a 
messiah or Maitreya. You may think, ‘I’m just a nobody’, but 
even being a nobody is being somebody in this life. You can be 
just as proud of being nobody as of being somebody, and just as 
deludedly attached to being nobody. But whatever you happen 
to believe, whether that you’re a nobody or a somebody, that 
you have a mission or are a nuisance and a burden to the world 
– however you might view yourself, the knowing is there to see 
the cessation of such a view.
Views arise and cease. The view: ‘I’m somebody, an important 
person who has a mission in life’ arises and ceases in the mind. 
Notice the ending of the view of being somebody important, or 
being nobody, or whatever – it all ceases. Everything that arises 
ceases, so there’s a non-grasping of the view of being somebody 
with a mission or of being nobody. There’s the end of that 
whole mass of suffering – of having to develop something, 
become somebody, change something, set everything right, 
get rid of all your defilements or save the world. Even the best 
ideals, the best thoughts can be seen as dhammas that arise
and cease in the mind.
You might think that this is a barren philosophy of life, because 
there seems to be a lot more heart and feeling in being somebody 
who’s going to save all sentient beings. People with self-sacrifice 
who have missions, help others and have something important 
to do are an inspiration. But when you notice that as dhamma, 
you are looking at the limitations of inspirations and their 
cessation. Then there is the dhamma of those aspirations and

AJAHN SUMEDHO

actions, rather than somebody who has to become something 
or do something.
The whole illusion is relinquished, and what remains is purity 
of mind. Then the response to experience comes from wisdom 
and purity rather than from a personal conviction of a mission, 
with its sense of self and other and all the complications that 
come from that whole pattern of delusion. 
Can you trust that? Can you trust in just letting everything 
go and cease, not being anybody and not having any mission, 
not having to become anything? Can you really trust in that, 
or do you find it frightening, barren or depressing? Maybe you 
really want inspiration: ‘Tell me everything is all right; tell me 
you really love me; what I’m doing is right and Buddhism is not 
just a selfish religion where you get enlightened for your own 
sake; tell me that Buddhism is here to save all sentient beings. 
Is that what you’re going to do, Ven. Sumedho? Are you really 
Mahayana or Hinayana?’
What I’m pointing to is what inspiration is as an experience – 
idealism: not trying to dismiss it or judge it in any way, but to 
reflect on it, to know what it is in the mind, and how easily we 
can be deluded by our own ideas and high-minded views. And 
to see how insensitive, cruel and unkind we can be through the 
attachment we have to views about being kind and sensitive. 
This is a real investigation into Dhamma.
I remember that in my own experience, I always had the view 
that I was somebody special in some way. I used to think, ‘Well 
I must be a special person.’ Way back when I was a child I was 
fascinated by Asia, and as soon as I could I studied Chinese 
at university, so surely I must have been a reincarnation of

THE W AY IT IS

somebody who was connected to the Orient. But consider 
this as a reflection: no matter how many signs of being special, 
or previous lives you can remember, or voices from God, or 
messages from the cosmos, whatever – I’m not denying those 
things or saying that they aren’t real, but they’re impermanent. 
They’re anicca, dukkha, anattā.
We’re reflecting on them as they really are. What arises ceases: a 
message from God is something that comes and ceases in your 
mind. God isn’t always talking to you continuously – unless 
you want to consider the sound of silence the voice of God, 
but then it doesn’t really say anything. We can call it anything 
– we can call it the voice of God or the divine, or the ringing 
of the cosmos, or blood in our eardrums. But whatever it is, 
it can be used for mindfulness and reflection – that’s what 
I’m pointing to, how to use these things without making
them into something.
Then the missions we have are responses, but not to experiences 
that we have in our lives. They’re not personal anymore. It’s 
no longer me, Sumedho Bhikkhu, with a mission, as if I’m 
specially chosen from above, more so than any of you. It’s not 
that any more. That whole manner of thinking and perceiving 
is relinquished. And whether or not I do save the world and 
thousands of beings, or help the poor in the slums of Calcutta, 
or help to cure all lepers and do all kinds of good works, that 
would be done not from the delusion of being a person, but as a 
natural response from wisdom.
This I trust: this is what saddhā is – it is faith in the Buddha’s 
word. Saddhā is a real trust and confidence in Dhamma: in just 
waiting, being nobody and not becoming anything, but being

AJAHN SUMEDHO

able just to wait and respond. And if there’s nothing much to 
respond to, it’s just waiting – coffee cup in hand, watching the 
rain, the sunset, getting old, witnessing the ageing process, the 
comings and goings in the monastery – the ordinations and 
the disrobings, the inspirations and the depressions, the highs 
and the lows, inside the mind, outside in the world. And there 
is the response – because when we have vigour, intelligence 
and talent, life always comes to ask us to respond to it in some 
skilful and compassionate way, which we are very willing and 
able to do.
We like to help people. I wouldn’t mind going to a Buddhist 
leper colony – I’d be glad to – or working in the shanty towns 
of Calcutta, or wherever, I’d have no objections; those kinds 
of things are rather appealing to my sense of nobility. But it’s 
not a mission, it’s not me having to do anything; it’s trusting in 
the Dhamma. Then the response to life is clear and of benefit, 
because it’s not coming from me as a person and the delusions 
of ignorance conditioning mental formations. We observe the 
restlessness, the compulsiveness, the obsessiveness of the mind, 
and let it cease. We let it go and it ceases.

THE W AY IT IS

20   |   NON-DUALISM   
A significant offe ring of the Buddhist teaching lies in what we 
call non- dualism. It’s the ‘neither-nor’ approach to philosophical 
questions. Monistic religion tends to talk about the One, the 
One God; the Whole, the Buddha-Nature or the One Mind, 
and that’s very inspiring. We turn to monistic doctrines 
for inspiration. But inspiration is only one level of religious 
experience, and you have to outgrow it. You have to let go of the 
desire for inspiration, the belief in God, the Oneness, the One 
Mind or all-embracing benevolence or universal fairness.
I’m not asking you to disbelieve in those things either. But 
the non- dualistic practice is a way of letting go of all that, of 
seeing the attachment to views, opinions and perceptions, 
because the perception of one’s mind is a perception. The 
perception of a universal benevolence is a perception to 
which we can attach. ‘The Buddha-Nature’ is a perception. 
‘Buddha’ is a perception. ‘The One God’ and ‘everything as 
one universal system, a global village where all is one and one 
is all, everything is fair and everything is kind, and God loves 
us’: these are perceptions which might be very nice, but they are 
still perceptions which arise and cease. Perceptions of monistic
doctrines arise and cease.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

What happens as a practical experience when you let things go 
and they cease? What’s left, what’s the remainder? This is what 
the Buddha is pointing to in teaching about the arising and 
cessation of conditions.
When the perception of self ceases and all the doctrines, all the 
inspired teaching, all the wise sayings cease, there is still the 
knower of the cessation. More views. And that leaves us with 
a blank mind. What is there to grasp? So the desire to know, 
to have something to grasp, comes up. We can sometimes see a 
kind of panic in our minds: ‘We’ve got to believe in something! 
Tell me about the universal benevolence!’ But that’s fear and 
desire operating again – ‘I want to believe in something! I need 
something to believe in! I want to know that everything is 
all right. I want to attach to and believe in the perceptions of 
oneness and wholeness.’ That desire, which you may not notice 
and may still be attached to, is still operating. That’s why the 
religious experience is often one of despair.
In the story of the crucifixion, the most impressive statement 
Christ made was: ‘My God, my God why hast thou forsaken 
me?’ What happened to the God who was protecting Jesus? 
Even God left him. That’s an anguished cry. The one perception 
‘I’ could count on suddenly dissolved in his mind. And after 
that of course came the acceptance and then the Resurrection, 
the being born anew to be free from all that illusion, from 
all that attachment to God, attachment to the doctrine,
attachment to even the highest ideas and the finest values.
All these things are still very good and praiseworthy. But it’s 
through attachment that we suffer, because if we attach to any 
perception, we are not realizing the truth. We are just attaching

THE W AY IT IS

to symbol, and grasping the symbol as being the reality. If I said: 
‘You see the Buddha sitting up there on the shrine? That’s the 
real Buddha. That is Buddha’, you’d think: ‘ Ajahn Sumedho 
has really gone crazy.’ Yet we can still attach to a perception of 
Buddha as Buddha. We are not at the stage where we are going 
to believe that the vast statue is Buddha, but we can be very 
attached to a view about Buddha. And it might be a very nice 
view, just as that Buddha-rupa is a very nice Buddha-rupa. I like 
that Buddha; it is very beautiful, and we don’t have to get rid of 
it because Buddha-rupas do not delude. What is dangerous is 
our attachment to a perception – of self, of others, of Buddha, 
of God, of Oneness, of wholeness.
When you can truly free your mind from attachment, all these 
particular angles are valid. We are not condemning monism 
as wrong. But attachment to monistic doctrine is limiting and 
blinding, just like attachment to non-dualism. The purpose of 
non-dualism is really a tremendous pointing at attachment. But 
if you are just a philosophical non-dualist, you can be attached 
to a kind of annihilation attitude.
I’m not asking you to attach to a position of non-dualism, but 
I have asked you not to try to inspire your mind or read about 
inspired monistic teaching and various other religions during 
this retreat, because in order to really learn how to use this 
particular tool, you have to follow the instructions and observe 
the results. And it can seem pretty barren, but we have to let go 
of that need for inspiration, right up to that point of despair. 
We have to learn to accept that emptiness, that silence, the 
cessation, the loneliness, the lack of warmth; and not ask for 
benevolence and kindness. We have to open to the silence and

AJAHN SUMEDHO

contemplate it, learning from it rather than running away from 
it and looking for a nice warm mother or a nice safe father.
Then one way you can describe this holy life is the growing 
up of an individual being to that maturity where we no longer 
linger in the warmth of adolescence or hildhood, or in the 
pleasures of the world.

THE W AY IT IS

21   |   REFLECTIONS ON
TEN DHAMMAS
Bhikkhus, there are ten dhammas which should be reflected 
upon again and again by one who has gone forth.
What are these ten?
‘I am no longer living according to worldly aims and values.’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘My very life is sustained through the gifts of others.’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘I should strive to abandon my former habits.’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘Does regret over my conduct arise in my mind?’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘Could my spiritual companions find fault with my conduct?’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

‘ All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become 
otherwise, will become separated from me.’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘I am the owner of my kamma, heir to my kamma, 
born of my kamma, related to my kamma,
abide supported by my kamma; whatever kamma
I shall do, for good or for ill, of that I will the heir.’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘The days and nights are relentlessly passing, 
how well am I spending my time.’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘Do I delight in solitude or not?’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
‘Has my practice borne fruit with freedom or insight, 
so that at the end of my life I need not feel ashamed 
when questioned by my spiritual companions?’
This should be reflected upon again and 
again by one who has gone forth.
Bhikkhus, these are the ten dhammas to be reflected 
upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

THE W AY IT IS

22   |   DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 1:
IGNORANCE IS SELF-VIEW
The uniqueness of the Buddhist approach is anattā – the 
realization of not-self. The particular style of reflection in 
structures like the Four Noble Truths and paṭiccasamuppāda 
changes the way of thinking from the self-view of the soul and 
‘me’ as an absolute to anattā, not-self.
The problem lies in the fact that ‘not-self ’ seems like 
annihilation, and what frightens people about Buddhism is 
that ‘not-self ’ and ‘no soul’ sound like an absolute position 
that one has to take as a Buddhist. People who hate God and 
resent Christianity may become Buddhists because they’ve 
got a grudge against God, the soul, sin and guilt. They really 
want Buddhism to be a kind of atheistic philosophy and a total 
rejection of the whole Christian experience. But that’s not what 
it is. Buddhism is not atheistic or nihilistic.
The Buddha was very careful to avoid such extreme positions. 
Instead his teaching is a very skilfully and carefully constructed 
psychology. Its aim is to help us see through and let go of all the 
habitual attachments – attitudes born out of ignorance, fear 
and desire – that create this illusory sense of a self. So for over 
2,500 years now Buddhism has managed to survive and keep

AJAHN SUMEDHO

its purity. And that is because its approach is very clear. There 
is a Sangha living under the Vinaya-discipline, and there’s the 
teaching of the Dhamma.
If we practise with this in the right way, we can really begin to 
see the suffering and misery we create over the illusions about 
ourselves. We’re not trying to create an illusion that there isn’t 
any self. The point is not to go from the illusion of self to the 
illusion of ‘there is no self ’, but rather to investigate, contemplate 
and have insight until the ineffable truth is realized by each one 
of us for ourselves.
Each one of us has our unique experience – we don’t all 
experience exactly the same things. We have different memories, 
experiences, tendencies and habits. And yet we always relate 
these infinite varieties to Dhamma teachings, so we are not 
just making totally subjective interpretations. We apply the 
Dhamma teaching to our experience, in order to be able to 
communicate and understand it in a context that is wider than 
that of personal subjectivity.
Often people deviate in their practice because religious 
experiences are interpreted too subjectively. They’re not put 
across in a form that can be communicated. They become 
unique personal experiences, rather than universal realizations. 
But the Buddha established a whole way of thinking and 
expressing the teachings that is exactly the same today. We’re not 
here to change it and bend it all to fit our personal experience. 
We measure our experience with the teaching, because the 
teachings are so skilfully made that they cover everything.
In the contemplation of paṭiccasamuppāda we’re coming to 
agreements on how its terms relate to contemplative experience.

THE W AY IT IS

When you first read paṭiccasamuppāda, you don’t understand 
it at all. ‘Ignorance conditions kammic formations; kammic 
formations condition consciousness, etc.’ So what? What does 
that mean? You imagine it must be very profound and probably 
takes a lifetime of studying Pali to understand, so you tend to 
brush it aside.
In Buddhist circles the Four Noble Truths can be glossed over. 
‘Oh yes – basic Buddhism. Yes ... now, let’s get on to the real 
advanced Mādhyamaka Buddhism!’ Or: ‘What did Dogen 
say?’ Or: ‘Milarepa is absolutely fascinating, isn’t he?’8 And you 
think: ‘“Suffering, Origin, Cessation and Path”, yes, we know 
that, now let’s get on to the real nitty-gritty.’
So the Four Noble Truths tend to be perfunctory beliefs. 
People don’t investigate or use them, because the teachings in 
themselves are not interesting. ‘Suffering, Origin, Cessation 
and Path’ is not an inspiring teaching, because it is a teaching 
for practice, not a teaching intended as inspirational. And this 
is why we use it: because that particular way of thinking and 
contemplating is psychologically valid. 
With it we can begin to understand that which we’ve never seen 
or understood before. In following this way of practice, you’re 
actually developing your mind and intelligence in a way that 
is very seldom done. Even in the most advanced educational 
systems, people don’t really train their minds in this particular 
way of reflection and contemplation. To think rationally is 
8. Mādhyamaka is a philosophical analysis of the principle of interdependency 
(as in Dependent Origination) propounded by Nāgārjuna in the latter half of the 
second century CE; Dogen (1200–1253 CE) was the founder of Soto Zen in Japan, 
and Milarepa (c. 1052–1135 CE) was a renowned Buddhist hermit-monk in Tibet 
from whom the Kagyu lineage traces its descent.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

highly regarded, but to understand what rationality is as a 
function of mind, you have to reflect on the nature of the 
mind. What is actually happening? What is it all about? And 
of course, these are the questions of existence, the existential 
questions: ‘Why was I born?’ ‘Is there a meaning to life?’ ‘What 
happens when I die?’ ‘What is it all about?’ ‘Is it meaningless 
– just a cosmic accident?’ ‘Does it relate to anything beyond 
itself, or is this merely something that happens and then that’s 
it – that’s the end?’
We have great problems with relating the meaning of life 
to anything real beyond the material world. So materialism 
becomes the reality for us. When we explore space, it’s always 
on the material plane. We want to go up in rocket ships and 
take our bodies up to the moon, because according to the 
materialist view that’s what’s real. Western materialism lacks 
subtlety and refinement: it brings us down to a very coarse level 
of consciousness, where reality is this gross material object, and 
the emotions are dismissed as not being real because they’re 
subjective. You can’t go round measuring emotions with 
electronic instruments. But of course the emotions are very real 
to us individually – what we’re feeling is really more important 
to us than a digital watch. Our fears, desires, loves, hates and 
aspirations are what really make our lives happy or miserable. 
And yet these can be dismissed in modern materialism for a 
world based on sensual pleasure, material wealth and rational 
thinking, so that the spiritual life seems to many people to be 
an illusion, because you can’t measure it with a computer or 
examine it with electronic instruments.
Yet in pre-scientific European civilization, the spiritual 
world was the real world. How do you think they built the

THE W AY IT IS

cathedrals? And art – all this came from a real sense of spiritual 
aspiration, of the human being connected to something 
beyond the material world. Spiritual truth is something each 
one must realize individually. Truth is self-realization, the 
ultimate subjectivity. And the Buddha takes subjectivity to 
the very centre of the universe, the silent still point, where 
the subject is not a personal subject. That still point is not
anybody’s or anything.
In meditation you’re moving towards that. You’re letting go of 
all these attachments to the changing conditions of the material 
world, the emotional plane, the intellectual plane, the symbolic 
plane, the astral plane. All that is let go of in order to realize the 
still point, the silence. This letting go is not an annihilation or 
a rejection, but it gives you the perspective to understand the 
whole. You cannot understand the whole from being out on the 
circumference, where you just get whirled around.
Being whirled around on the circumference means that you’re 
lost in attachment to all the things that are whirling around. 
It’s called saṁsāra , where you’re just going around in circles 
and you can’t get any perspective in saṁsāra . You have no 
ability to stop and watch or observe because you’re just caught
in this circular movement.
In this way of the Four Noble Truths and paṭiccasamuppāda , 
the aim of meditation is to stop the mind’s whirling. You abide 
in stillness, not as an attack against the conditioned world, 
but in order to see it in perspective. You’re not annihilating it 
or criticizing it, or trying to get out of it in any way through 
aversion or fear of it. You’re getting to the centre, to the still 
point where you can see it for what it is, and know it, and not

AJAHN SUMEDHO

be frightened or deluded by it anymore. And we do this within 
the limitation of our personal experience. So we can say, ‘Each 
one for themself ’, because that’s how it looks when we’re sitting 
here. And yet that still point is not in the mind, it’s not in the 
body. This is where it’s ineffable. The full mind or the still point 
isn’t a point within the brain. Yet you’re realizing that universal 
silence, stillness, oneness, where all the rest is a reflection and 
seen in perspective. And the personality, the kamma, the 
differences, the varieties and all these things are no longer 
deluding us, because we’re no longer grasping at them.
As we examine the mind more and more, as we reflect and 
contemplate on it and learn from it, we all begin to realize 
the stillness of mind, which is always present, but which with 
most people is not even noticed, because the life of saṁsāra 
is so busy, so frantic that one is whirled around. Even though 
the still point is always here, it’s never seen until you have an 
opportunity to abide in the stillness rather than go around
on the circumference.
Not that stillness is something to attach to either. We’re not 
trying to become people who are still, just sitting here in 
stillness, not feeling anything. I know that some of you come in 
here and create a personal world that you can inhabit through 
the hour of meditation. But that’s not the way out of suffering; 
that subjective and personal world is very dependent on things 
being a certain way. It is so fragile and so ephemeral that it is 
destroyed by the slightest disruption. The refined world of 
tranquillity is so lovely, so peaceful – then somebody moves 
their robes, somebody’s stomach growls, somebody snores. It’s 
disgusting to be disturbed from these fine tranquil states by 
coarse bodily functions.

THE W AY IT IS

But stillness isn’t tranquillity. It’s not necessary that we should 
be tranquil, but there’s stillness when we can trust in abiding in 
the silence, rather than following our compulsive tendencies. 
We all tend to think we’ve got to be doing something; we’re so 
conditioned to do things that even meditation becomes some 
kind of compulsive activity that we’re involved in. ‘Develop this 
... develop that ... I have to develop my samādhi , and I have to 
develop the jhānas .’ You don’t just come in here and sit, you 
come in here and develop! That’s how we think. We feel guilty 
if we are not doing anything, not progressing, developing, 
getting anywhere. And yet to be able to come in here and sit in 
stillness is not a very easy thing to do. It’s much easier to make 
great meditation development projects, five-year plans and so 
forth. Yet you always end up at the still point, things as they are.
With understanding more and more, there can be a letting go of 
the desire to develop and become anything. And as one’s mind 
is freed from all that desire to become and get something, to 
attain something, Truth starts revealing itself. It’s ever present, 
here and now. It’s a matter of just being able to be open and 
sensitive so that Truth is revealed. It’s not something that is 
revealed from outside. The Truth is always present, but we 
don’t see it if we’re caught up in the idea of attainments, of ‘me’ 
having to do something, having to get something. 
So the Buddha made a direct attack on ‘me and mine.’ That’s the 
only thing that’s blocking you. The obstacle is the attachment 
to a self-view, that’s what is the problem. If you just see through 
that self-view, let go of that, you’ll understand the rest. You 
don’t need to know all the other kinds of elaborate esoteric 
formulas. You don’t have to go endlessly into the complexity if 
you just let go of the ignorant view of ‘I am.’

AJAHN SUMEDHO

See that, and know and understand the way of letting go, of 
non-attachment. Then the Truth reveals itself wherever you 
are, all the time. But until you do that, you’ll always be caught 
in creating problems and complications.
‘ Avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṁ, 
viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṁ, nāmarūpapaccayā 
saḷāyatanaṁ, saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso, phassapaccayā 
vedanā, vedanāpaccayā taṇhā, taṇhāpaccayā 
upādānaṁ, upādānapaccayā bhavo, bhavapaccayā 
jāti, jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṁ soka-paridevadukkha-domanassupāyāsā sambhavanti.’ 9 
All this means that if you keep insisting on being attached to 
the illusions of a self, to greed, hatred and delusion, all you’re 
going to ever get at the end are old age, sickness, and death, 
grief, sorrow, despair and anguish. That’s all you’ll get for the 
rest of your life – a pretty boring prospect. But you can be free 
from that here and now through right understanding, seeing 
things in the right way. There can be the knowing of Truth, in 
which we are no longer deluded by appearances or habits, or by 
the conditions around us. 
9. For an explanation of this sequence, please see ‘ A Note Before Y ou Begin’ at the 
beginning of this book.

THE W AY IT IS

23   |   DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 2:
MOMENTARY ARISING
In Ajahn Buddhadāsa’s book on dependent origination, he 
emphasizes that his approach has been on paṭiccasamuppāda as 
working in the moment, rather than in terms of past, present 
and future lives. When you contemplate, when you practise, 
you realize that that is the only way it could ever be. This is 
because we are working with the mind itself.
Even when we are considering the birth of a human body, 
we are not commenting on the birth of our own bodies, but 
recognizing mentally that these bodies were born. Then we 
note in reflection that mental consciousness arises and ceases. 
So that whole sequence of Dependent Origination arises and 
ceases in a moment. The arising and the cessation from avijjā 
are momentary, it is not a kind of permanent avijjā . It would 
be a mistaken view to assume that everything began with avijjā 
and will all cease some time in the future.
In this sense avijjā means not understanding the Four Noble 
Truths. When there is understanding of suffering, origin, 
cessation and path, things are no longer affected by avijjā. 
We see the perceptions with vijjā as conventional reality, no 
longer ‘me’ and ‘mine’. For example, when there is vijjā I can

AJAHN SUMEDHO

say ‘I am Ajahn Sumedho’ – that is a conventional reality, still 
a perception but it is no longer viewed from avijjā, it’s merely a 
convention we use. There’s nothing more to it than that. It is 
as it is.
When we reach the cessation of ignorance, at that moment all 
the rest of the sequence ceases. It is not that one ceases and then 
another ceases. When there is vijjā , suffering ceases. In any 
moment when there is true mindfulness and wisdom, there 
is no suffering. Suffering has ceased. When you contemplate 
the cessation of desire, the cessation of grasping ( upādāna), 
there is the cessation of becoming, the cessation of rebirth and 
suffering. When things cease, when everything ceases, there is 
peace. There is knowing, serenity, emptiness, not-self. These 
are the words, the concepts, describing cessation.
When I practise in this way, I find it is very difficult to find 
any suffering. I realize there isn’t any suffering except in a 
heedless moment when one gets carried away with something. 
So because of heedlessness, lack of attention and forgetting, 
we get caught in habitual (kammic) mind stuff. But when 
we realize we have been heedless we can let it cease, we can 
let go. There is the letting go, the abiding in emptiness. No 
longer are there the strong impulses to grasp; the fascination 
and glamour of the sensory world have been penetrated. No 
longer is there anything to grasp. One can still experience 
and see the way things are without grasping them. There’s 
nobody grasping anything. There can still be feeling, seeing 
and hearing, taste and touch, but they are no longer created
into a person, ‘me and mine.’

THE W AY IT IS

For me the important insight is just how momentary 
consciousness is. The tendency is to perceive consciousness as 
a long-term thing, being awake and conscious as a permanent 
state of being rather than a moment. And yet viññāṇa is always 
described as a moment, a flashing moment, an instant. So rather 
than assume that avijjā is a continuous process from the birth 
out of our bodies, we can see that at any moment there can 
be vijjā and the whole thing just ceases. The cessation of that 
whole mass of suffering can be realized. It’s gone! Where is it?
T o practise this way is to keep examining things so that 
everything is seen exactly for what it is. Everything is only what 
it is in the moment. When we see that beauty is just beauty in 
the moment, ugliness is just that in the moment, there is no 
attempt to solidify it or prolong it in any way, because things 
are just what they are. One is increasingly aware of the formless 
or nebulous as just what it is, rather than something that is 
overlooked, dismissed or misinterpreted.
The problem of perception is that it tends to limit us to just 
being conscious of certain points. We tend to be conscious at 
certain designated points, and the natural change and flux and 
flow are not really noticed. One is only conscious at A, B, C, D, 
E, F, G – the points between A and B are never really noticed 
because one is only really conscious at the designated points 
of perception. That is why, when the mind is opened with 
vijjā and is receptive, Dhamma reveals itself; there is a kind of 
revelation. The empty mind in the state of wonder allows truth 
to be revealed, but no longer through perception. This is where 
it is ineffable truth; words fail us and it is impossible to put it 
into perceptions or concepts.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Maybe now you are beginning to appreciate the emphasis the 
Buddha made: ‘I teach only two things ... there is suffering 
and there is the end of suffering.’ If you have just that insight 
into understanding suffering and then realize the end of 
suffering, you are liberated from ignorance. If you attempt to 
speculate on what that is like, you could call it nibbāna , the 
highest happiness, but ‘highest happiness’ is not quite it either. 
T o expect the highest happiness sounds like expecting to get 
high, floating in the air, reaching nibbāna and floating up to 
the ceiling. But the Way is one of realization; mindfulness and 
realization. The Eightfold Path is development, bhāvanā : to 
develop that path to right understanding. More and more we 
realize the emptiness, the not- self, the freedom from not being 
attached to anything, which affects what we say, what we do 
and how we live in the society we are in by increasing the sense 
of serenity and calm.
That word ‘nibbāna’ is generally defined as ‘non-attachment to 
the five khandhā’, which means no longer experiencing a sense 
of a self with regard to the body and mind – rūpa, vedanā, 
saññā, saṅkhārā, viññāṇa. We no longer contemplate the five 
khandhā with avijjā , but with vijjā . We see that they are all 
impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self.
Nibbāna is the realization of non-attachment wherein the selfview ceases. The body is still breathing, so it doesn’t dissolve 
into thin air, but the mistaken identity that ‘I am the body’ 
dissolves. The mistaken identification with vedanā, saññā, 
saṅkhārā, viññāṇa – all that ceases. The self dissolves, you can’t 
find anybody. You can’t find yourself because you are yourself.

THE W AY IT IS

In the traditional view of Dependent Origination occurring 
over the span of three lives, the five khandhā are seen as a kind 
of permanent form from birth. The body, feelings, perceptions, 
mental formations and consciousness are considered as being 
continuous from birth. But that’s an assumption we make, and 
the reflection of momentary arising points to the mind itself. 
The body isn’t a person anyway: it’s not ‘me’ and ‘mine’, never 
was, never will be. There’s only the perception of it as ‘me’ and 
‘mine’, the belief that I was born.
I have a birth certificate to prove that this body was born. We 
carry birth certificates in our mind – we carry around the 
whole history, the memories and so forth of our lives, giving 
us this sense of a continuity of a person from birth to the 
present moment. But examination of perception alone shows 
that perception arises and ceases. This perception of me as a 
permanent personality is just a moment. It arises and ceases.
Consciousness too is just momentary and conveys the attractive, 
repulsive and neutral qualities of the conditioned realm. When 
one sees that clearly, there is no longer any interest in that 
attachment and in seeking for happiness, trying to be reborn 
into happiness or beauty, pleasure, safety or security. Rebirth is 
a grasping of the conditioned realm, so we let that go. The five 
khandhā are still the five khandhā, but they are seen for what 
they are, as impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self.
So this reflection on the truth of the way it is, is very direct, 
very clear. From the confused, amorphous, nebulous, insecure, 
unstable, uncertain to the certain – whatever it is, we are no 
longer choosing which we prefer, we are just noting that 
whatever arises ceases. As you realize this through your

AJAHN SUMEDHO

practice, a lot of the vagueness, and fuzziness of your mind 
are seen for exactly what they are. Confusion is confusion, 
just that, it’s a dhamma.
Confusion is just confusion in the moment, it’s not permanent 
or the self. So what before was a problem or something deluding 
us is transformed into a dhamma . The transformation is not 
through changing the condition, but through changing the 
attitude from ignorance to clarity.
People say: ‘ All this is very well, but what about love and 
compassion?’ The block for all that is desire. Love is no problem 
once there is no delusion; once there is no self, there’s nothing 
to hinder, block off or prevent love. But as long as there is selfillusion, love is just an idea that we long for but always feel 
disappointed with – because the self is getting in the way. The 
self-view is always blinding us, making us forget and deluding 
us that there isn’t any love. We feel alienated, lonely and lost 
because there doesn’t seem to be any love, so we blame somebody 
else. Or maybe we blame ourselves for not being lovable, or we 
become cynics.
But the Buddha pointed to this and asked what the real problem 
was. It’s the illusion of a self. It’s attachment to that perception. 
That affects consciousness and everything else, so we are always 
creating separations and dissatisfaction, and identifying with 
that which is not ourselves. Once we are free from that illusion, 
love is ever-present. It’s just that we can’t see it or enjoy it when 
we are blinded by our desires and fears. As you understand this 
more and more, your faith increases and there is a willingness 
to give up everything. There is a real zest, a joy in being with the 
way things are.

THE W AY IT IS

24   |   DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 3:
THE FORMATION OF SELF
Avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā: this means ‘Ignorance conditions the 
kammic formations’, i.e. body and mind as defined by the five 
khandhā. That is when we operate from a position of ignorance, 
not understanding the truth, and everything that we experience 
and do and say and feel is conditioned from that ignorance, 
absolutely everything. This is where the self-view is such a blind 
spot. When we think of the kammic formation as ‘self ’ rather 
than as ‘not-self ’ everything that happens, everything that is 
experienced is referred to that sense of a person, as a physical 
body, ‘me’ as a perception. This is avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā.
If you have the insight that all conditions are impermanent, all 
dhamma is not-self, then there’s knowing or vijjā, and truth or 
Dhamma rather than ignorance ( avijjā) and habitual kamma 
(saṅkhārā). There’s knowing the Dhamma, the truth of the 
way it is. Then all the rest follows suit, everything is seen as it is. 
There’s no distortion: consciousness, the five aggregates and the 
sense world are seen as Dhamma rather than as self.
What is your suffering in life, anyway? Why do you suffer? If 
you investigate you can always trace it back to avijjāpaccayā 
saṅkhārā. There’s natural suffering, going hungry, getting old

AJAHN SUMEDHO

and getting sick, but that’s all bearable. That’s nothing that 
we can’t bear. Sickness, old age and death are things we can 
always bear with. They’re not real suffering. Suffering is the 
greed, hatred and delusion we produce through the self-view, 
through taking it all personally. The creations and attachments 
to wrong views, prejudices, biases and all the horrors that we are 
responsible for can all be traced back to avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā.
We can’t really expect very much improvement if we still insist 
on being ignorant, caught in the self-view. Even though we 
might be able to improve conditions slightly by trying to be a 
good person, as long as there is attachment to self-view there is 
delusion, so even the goodness we do comes from delusion. It 
doesn’t lead anyone out of suffering. If we don’t have wisdom, 
often we try to do good but end up harming and causing all 
kinds of problems, while thinking we can tell others what is 
good for them.
What is the way it is at this moment? Your body is sitting. You 
can feel things – pleasure, pain, heat, cold or whatever. This is 
the way things are. There’s no self in that, we are not creating 
the self. When we bring our attention to the way things are, 
we can see what we do when we add ‘me’ and ‘mine’ to the 
moment: what I think, what I feel, what I want, what I don’t 
want, what I like, what I don’t like. Or we can be aware of 
the selves we create in others, my opinions about you. I have 
suffered a lot from creating people in my mind, not because 
anybody was really cruel to me, but because of all the things 
I used to create about myself and about other people. The fear 
of what others thought, jealousies, envy, greed, possessiveness. 
I would have my prejudices and views about people, what I 
thought they were really up to and my suspicions about what

THE W AY IT IS

they really wanted. So suffering comes out of the creations we 
make about ourselves and others, about our parents, and the 
people closest to us.
What is suffering? Really ask yourself, what is the suffering 
of your life? Yesterday the cold winds were blowing through 
me as I was walking out there in the field. Is that suffering? I 
could make it suffering. I hate this cold wind. But actually it 
was all right – I mean it was something I could completely bear. 
If I didn’t make anything about it in my mind, it was just cold 
wind, that’s all. Yet we can spend time in Amaravati creating 
attitudes about monks, nuns, and laypeople.
You can really make senior nuns into big ogres! We can have 
strong views about seniority. If we are in a senior position we 
can be very attached to it – ‘I am senior to you. You are just 
a new monk. Do that. I’m boss.’ So we can create ourselves as 
being senior monks. But we are not here to create kamma based 
on ignorance. The conventions we have are merely expedient 
means. They are simplifications, moral agreements and 
community agreements to make life simple and uncomplicated, 
and also to allow us to reflect on the way we relate to people 
above; senior people, equal people, junior people.
The Buddha said: ‘The view that everybody is equal is a 
delusion.’ ‘I am superior to everyone’ is a delusion. ‘I am inferior 
is a delusion. ‘I am’ is a delusion if that identity is based on 
ignorance. But when there’s vijjā, ‘I am’ is merely conventional 
reality. It’s just the way we talk: ‘I am hungry’ or ‘I am Sumedho 
Bhikkhu’, but it’s not a person.
When there’s avijjā it conditions the saṅkhārā, which condition 
consciousness or viññāṇa. Consciousness conditions mentality

AJAHN SUMEDHO

and corporeality ( nāma-rūpa), which conditions the sense 
bases ( saḷāyatana), which condition contact ( phassa), which 
conditions feeling ( vedanā). When ignorance is the primary 
condition, the rest are all affected by it. The sensory world, body 
and mind are related to in terms of ‘me’ and ‘mine’. This is the 
self-view. In contrast to Brahmanism, where the Hindu talks 
about the Atman, or the higher self, the One, when the Buddha 
talks of self, it is related to attachment to the five khandhā, 
to body, feeling, perceptions, volitions and consciousness. 
Attachment to that, ignorance, conditions kammic formations. 
All this creates a sense of a self.
This self-view starts to become strong when you are aged six to 
seven. You go to school and you compete and compare, and this 
strong sense of a self starts being conditioned into your mind. 
I remember the first five or six years of my life being magical, 
and then after six or seven it started getting increasingly worse. 
Before that there wasn’t very much a sense of self.
In a country like the States – which is a very nice country, 
actually – there is an emphasis on self-view. There is not a 
tremendous amount of wisdom in that country, and the 
personality view is very much the dominant theme: ‘I am an 
individual, I have my rights. I can do what I want. You can’t 
tell me what to do. Who do you think you are? I’m as good 
as you are. Get off my back.’ The egalitarian Americans have 
strong individualistic attachment to being an individual with a 
fascinating personality, a real character, a ‘good guy’. This is the 
American emphasis on the personal level. Being a ‘good guy’ 
is all right; there’s nothing wrong with it, but as avijjāpaccayā 
saṅkhārā it can only bring suffering. When there are ignorance 
and the self-view, the ‘good guy’ is always going to suffer.

THE W AY IT IS

Avijjā conditions the saṅkhārā, which condition consciousness, 
which conditions mentality-corporeality, which conditions the 
six senses, which conditions contact and then feeling, and then 
feeling conditions desire – the vedanā-taṇhā connection. You 
can notice that if you are caught in attachment to personality 
view or self, desire, grasping ( upādāna) and becoming ( bhava) 
will be operating. You will be lost in that pattern, because 
when there is ignorance in the moment it affects everything – 
consciousness, the senses and sense-objects, feeling – and then 
desire comes into it: ‘I want something.’ ‘I want to be happy.’ ‘I 
want to become.’ ‘I want to get rid of.’ ‘I want.’
Examine desire during this retreat; really get to know what 
desire is. From my own reflection on it, I see it is always energy 
aiming at something, whether it’s restless and scattered or 
aimed at something definite. There is a strong desire to get rid of 
things we don’t like as quickly as possible. We want to get what 
we want instantly and get rid of what we don’t like instantly; we 
don’t value patience any more in our society. We want efficiency. 
Everything looks nice, and then something comes in and makes 
a mess, and we have to clean it up immediately because we don’t 
want obstacles or hindrances, or anything unpleasant. We want 
to get rid of it quickly, so we are very impatient and we can get 
very upset and annoyed at things because of this desire to get 
rid of, this vibhava-taṇhā.
The desire to become, ambition, bhava-taṇhā , is often a 
motivation within the religious life – we want to become an 
enlightened personality. So bhava-taṇhā and vibhava-taṇhā are 
to be studied and examined. You can reflect on them; you can 
listen to these desires: ‘I want to get enlightened.’ ‘I want to get 
samādhi. I want to make the best I can out of this retreat so I can

AJAHN SUMEDHO

have some kind of achievement or attainment from it all.’ Or to 
get rid of things: ‘I hope I get rid of all my lust and anger during 
this retreat. I hope to get rid of the jealousy, so I never have to 
be jealous again. During this retreat I am working on jealousy. 
I’m working on doubt or fear – if I can get rid of my fear by 
the end of this retreat I will have no more fear left, because I’m 
going to get right in there and annihilate fear.’ That’s vibhavataṇhā – ‘There is something wrong with me and I have got to 
make it right. I have got to become something else by getting rid 
of these bad things, these wrong things about me.’ It’s all ‘I am’ 
and ‘me-and-mine’.
Kāma-taṇhā is quite obvious – it is the desire for pleasurable 
sense experiences. These forms of desire are to be known and 
understood. The trap is that we tend to think the Buddha 
teaches us to get rid of our desires. That is how some people 
interpret Buddhism. But that’s wrong: the Buddha taught us 
how to look at and understand desire so that we do not grasp it. 
That’s not telling us to get rid of desire, but to really understand 
it so that it can no longer delude us. The desire to get rid of desire 
is still desire, it is not looking at desire. With that desire you 
are just grasping a perception that you shouldn’t have desires 
and you have to get rid of them. But through understanding 
Dependent Origination we see taṇhā as Dhamma rather than 
as self -– you are looking at taṇhā , desire, as that which arises 
and ceases. That’s Dhamma. In twenty-two years of careful 
looking and close observation, I have not found one desire that 
arises and keeps arising. If any of you do find one, please tell me.
Kāma-taṇhā is fairly coarse and fairly obvious: ‘I want 
something to eat’, or sexual desires. But vibhava-taṇhā can be 
very subtle, righteous and important, and one can be deluded

THE W AY IT IS

by that righteous quality. The desire to get rid of evil can seem 
so right. We can dedicate our lives to getting rid of the evils in 
this world and become fanatical. This is what you can see in 
modern social problems. There are the degenerate tendencies of 
this society, leading to sexual aberrations and drugs, and then 
there are the very righteous forms of fundamentalism which 
condemn the degenerate, loose-living, immoral behaviour of 
one element of society. But we are looking at desire itself, from 
the gross forms of want and lust to the righteous passion of 
‘wanting to kill and annihilate these degenerates.’
Contemplate that as something within your mind. I have seen 
both tendencies in myself. I can become attracted to sensual 
pleasures, and I can also be really hard and self- righteous, and 
critical of others or myself. Bhava-taṇhā can be very sweet 
too, when it is intended for the welfare of others. It’s not just 
that I want to attain something so I can say I have attained 
something. There is also the bhava-taṇhā of wanting because 
I feel I would like to help everyone else. There is still the ‘I am’ 
– ‘I want to get enlightened, and then I am going to really help 
everyone else, and I want to become someone who is not selfish 
but works totally for the welfare of all sentient beings.’ That’s 
very altruistic – it’s beautiful and inspiring, but it can also be 
bhava-taṇhā if it is coming from avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā.
When we see clearly with vijjā and see Dhamma, there is 
nobody to become anything, or to achieve or attain. Things are 
as they are. Good is done and bad is refrained from in action 
and speech. There is doing good. What is there left to do in life 
but to be virtuous? Isn’t that the beauty of our humanity?

AJAHN SUMEDHO

What is truly joyful and lovely about being human is our ability 
to be virtuous. I can’t think of anything else to do. The human 
experience is for virtue and goodness, and refraining from 
doing evil harmful things to ourselves and others. I can’t think 
of anything else worth doing.

THE W AY IT IS

25   |   DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 4:
 FEELING CONDITIONS DESIRE   
At the beginning of the practice, paṭiccasamuppāda is 
avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā: ignorance conditions the kammic 
formations. Avijjā is the ignorance of not knowing the Four 
Noble Truths. There is ignorance in any being who does not 
understand that there is suffering, the arising of suffering, the 
cessation of suffering and the Path leading to its cessation. 
Conversely, the word for knowledge in this sense is vijjā. Vijjā is 
the knowing of the Four Noble Truths: insight into suffering, 
its origin, cessation and the Path.
When we haven’t had insight into Truth, avijjā , not knowing, 
conditions the saṅkhārā. We create an ‘I am.’ The saṅkhāra ‘I 
am’ is created and conditioned from that avijjā . Notice that 
the first Noble Truth does not say ‘I suffer’; it says, ‘There is 
suffering; there is dukkha.’ It’s not saying that anybody suffers. 
However, we think we suffer. We think, ‘I suffer a lot in this life 
... He’s a real sufferer ... She suffers all the time ... I’ve suffered a 
lot in my life. I wasn’t born with the best kammic formations 
available on this planet, and I’ve really had to suffer. Poor me!’ 
But the suffering is what we create, out of ignorance. The 
important point the Buddha made was that we should live in 
accordance with knowledge rather than ignorance.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

This Buddhist practice is a way of knowledge, of knowing; it’s 
all about knowing the truth. That’s why I don’t particularly 
feel sorry for anybody when they think they suffer a lot. I could 
say, ‘Poor thing. I really feel sorry for you that you’ve had to 
suffer.’ But thinking that one is suffering is not the position 
of knowing. Things have happened in the past, perhaps 
unfortunate occurrences, and then we think and indulge, 
which carries them on in the present with all kinds of additional 
suffering. But when there’s knowledge, insight, vijjā, we realize 
there’s nobody to suffer. We see things as they are.
Every human being has the ability to see the way things are 
clearly and not create suffering about it. Admittedly we’ve all 
experienced unfortunate things or done foolish things. This is 
just ordinary human experience. Once we’re born, anything can 
happen to us. The whole range of life’s experiences is possible 
for us, from the most fortunate to the most unfortunate ones. 
That’s the result of birth. There’s nothing wrong with that; it’s 
just the way it is. Birth in the human realm is risky – we can’t be 
sure what we’re getting into. It could be a real mess, or it could 
be a delight; or it could be sometimes messy and sometimes 
delightful, or one-quarter messy, three-fourths mediocre and 
no delightful things at all.
Being born in this human world, into sensory consciousness, 
is like this: it’s unstable, uncertain, it changes, and we cannot 
find any security within it. This is what we all have in common. 
From the most fortunate to the least fortunate human beings, 
we are all vulnerable, being in a shape and form that can be 
damaged, hurt and diseased. When we look at this side of our 
human existence, we don’t feel prejudices and strong views

THE W AY IT IS

concerning race, class, sex, nationality and so forth. We’re all 
brothers and sisters in old age, sickness and death.
Having been born, there’s viññāṇa, consciousness, there’s body, 
nāma-rūpa. There are the sense organs – saḷāyatana – the eye, 
ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. There is phassa or contact with 
the sense objects; and there’s vedanā , feeling. This vedanā 
is the result of birth and consciousness, and in this sense is 
applied to sensory experience, to the attractive, neutral and unattractive qualities.
The experience of vedanā through the eyes doesn’t mean your 
eyes ache or hurt; it means that when you see beautiful flowers 
as attractive, the vedanā of attraction is pleasant. There is also 
unpleasant or neutral feeling. That whole process will then 
stimulate desire, grasping and becoming ( taṇhā- upādānabhava). We become what we desire. Now apply that to all the 
senses and their objects – to sound, smell, taste, touch and 
thought. Some of our thoughts are very pleasant, some are 
neither pleasant nor unpleasant, and some are unpleasant. 
This is the sensitivity of these bodies; they’re totally sensitive 
conditions, they’re conscious and they feel.
This is just the way it is. Some of you only want to be partially 
sensitive. You’re frightened of being totally sensitive. You’d like 
to become sensitive only to nice things, and you’d like to pray 
to God and say: ‘Oh God, please give me everything nice, only 
pleasant feelings, and please make everything beautiful for me. 
And never let me suffer, and let me always have success and 
happiness and beautiful people around me until I die.’ That’s 
the whinging human mind wanting only partial sensitivity.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Vijjā or ‘insight knowledge’, is is knowing the pleasant and 
neutral and unpleasant as they are. We’re not asking for partial 
sensitivity any more, or for the best of the sensory experiences, 
but opening towards total sensitivity, which includes all 
possibilities for pain, ugliness, unpleasantness. Avijjā says: ‘I 
don’t want to lose my looks; I don’t want to have any unpleasant 
experiences; I want to be happy.’ That’s avijjā. Vijjā says: ‘There 
is suffering; there is its origin and its cessation, and there is the 
way out of suffering.’
So contemplate this ‘I am’ that cries and weeps and fears and 
desires. Why are we frightened? What are we frightened of and 
anxious about? It is the possibility of pain, isn’t it? – of being 
physically harmed, diseased or emotionally exploited, or hurt in 
some way; of being rejected, unloved, looked down on, getting 
cancer or Parkinson’s disease. ‘I don’t want that, I want perfect 
health. I’m afraid I might have some terrible disease. What if 
I have one of those heart attacks where for the next thirty to 
forty years I’m a kind of cabbage and the monks have to do 
everything, put me on the potty? I don’t want that, I couldn’t 
bear to be a nuisance or a burden to anyone.’ ‘I don’t want to be 
a burden’ is an English obsession.
So ‘I am’ is something to contemplate and observe because 
it is something that we’re convinced is a reality. Because of 
ignorance, ‘I am’ is truth for most human beings. And it’s very 
natural to want happiness and want to run away from pain. 
You see something beautiful, you grasp it, you want it. You see 
something ugly, you want to get rid of it. Those are the natural 
reactions on the sensory plane. If that’s all there is to it, you just 
have to try to get all the best you can and run away from all 
the bad, and there’s no way out. It’s each one for themselves –

THE W AY IT IS

survival. The clever and the strong survive, and the stupid and 
the weak will be at the bottom, in the pits.
But the human being is equipped with a reflective mind; we 
can reflect and contemplate vedanā. We can observe and 
contemplate what attraction is and what beauty is. We’re not 
just dumb animals: we can actually watch ourselves wanting to 
grab and possess the beautiful. We can observe and reflect on 
our aversion to anything ugly and unpleasant; and we can also 
contemplate what is neither pleasant nor unpleasant.
Our normal breathing is neither pleasant nor unpleasant; it’s 
neither attractive nor unattractive. That’s why you have to pay 
attention to it, because if the breath were attractive it would 
attract you, and I wouldn’t have to say, ‘Watch your breath’ 
– you’d be watching it anyway because it was so attractive. 
Breathing is the most important physiological function, and the 
body does it whether we’re aware of it or not, whether we’re crazy 
or sane, young or old, male or female, rich or poor, or whatever. 
Breathing is this way. It’s neither exciting or interesting, nor 
is it disgusting or revolting. But as we concentrate, bringing  
our attention to breathing of the body – what happens? Well, 
when I concentrate on my breath the mind goes tranquil, 
I feel tranquillized by being able to concentrate on the
breathing of this body.
Ānāpānasati is boring to most people at first; just inhalation- 
exhalation, the same old thing. The breathing of the body is 
neutral vedanā. When we do the meditation of sweeping 
through the feeling of the body, the pressure of the body sitting 
on the seats and the clothes touching the skin, that’s neutral 
feeling. Then we can observe the vedanā through the ear, the

AJAHN SUMEDHO

nose, the tongue, the eye, the body, the mind. And we start 
to see that this is just the sensory realm, not a person, just the 
way it is. There’s nothing wrong with that, nothing bad about 
it at all. Vedanā is all right. There’s just the pleasant and the 
painful and the neutral; they’re just what they are. However, 
to be aware of pleasure, pain and neutral vedanā means that 
we have to bear it, really accept it rather than just reacting to it. 
We reflect on it, contemplate it so that we really understand it. 
If we don’t contemplate and have insight into vedanā , we just 
continue this process of paṭiccasamuppāda – so we have desires, 
because vedanā conditions taṇhā, desire. But with insight we 
can break the habit. We can contemplate vedanā . Then we 
begin to understand how desire arises: wanting the pleasure, 
not wanting the pain, and just ignoring the neutral.
A person who lives a very fast life has a life based on going 
from one exciting, thrilling thing to the next. When we think 
of really exciting lifestyles, what is usually involved? Usually 
they are full of frantic attempts to have fantastic sensual 
experience, always running about, because yesterday’s fantastic 
sensual experience is boring. There’s a need to have new sensual 
experiences, new romances and adventures, because anything 
becomes boring when it’s repeated. So saṁsāra is the cycle, the 
endless running about looking for the next interesting thing, 
the next excitement, the next romance, the next adventure – 
the next, the next, the next. Notice how insidious that is in our 
lives. Even in the monastic life, even in a meditation retreat, 
we can still be caught up in trying to get onto the next thing, 
sitting here thinking about what we’ll do after the retreat, or 
trying to find something to make our lives more interesting 
here at Amaravati.

THE W AY IT IS

What is interest? Things that are interesting are things that are 
attractive and hold our attention. We want to be attracted by 
something. We want attractive things, pleasurable experiences, 
beautiful objects, beautiful music and sounds. They are 
interesting, they hold our attention, they please and fascinate 
us. If an experience is unpleasant, we dread it. For most people 
the idea of having to be in some place where there’s nothing 
beautiful – dreary, boring people; gross, coarse and bad odours; 
men and women who have no culture; disgusting, foul, stinking 
evil brutes; pain, sickness – can be a hell-realm. We dread that 
this is what we might end up with. It might happen that we 
get stuck in some miserable place. So we want to avoid and get 
rid of all of that, and then try to get hold of as many pleasant 
experiences as possible.
And yet most of our lives are neither pleasant nor painful 
vedanā. When you contemplate most of your life, I’m sure that 
for most of you about 98 percent has been neither pleasant nor 
painful. When I think of my life, about 2 percent has been 
highly pleasant or highly painful, and about 98 percent has been 
neither pleasant nor painful, but just what it is. And yet that 98 
percent of one’s life can go by totally unnoticed, because we are 
so attached to the extremes of waiting for the next thing, longing 
and expecting and hoping, and then dreading and fearing the 
possibility of not having any more pleasure, not having a good 
time. Well, just think of our day here at Amaravati or anywhere 
in the world. How much of it is really pleasurable or painful?
The Buddha advised us to bring our attention to the neitherpleasant- nor-painful things in life, because to accept and 
notice neither-pleasure- nor-pain means we have to be attentive 
and alert. If something is not attractive or repulsive, it doesn’t

AJAHN SUMEDHO

make us react. It doesn’t stimulate our minds at all. So we 
have to bring our attention to it, be awake to it. That’s why in 
meditation we sit, we stand, we walk, we lie down; four basic 
postures, normal breathing, things that are so ordinary, but 
are not pleasurable nor painful. The practice of mindfulness 
is to bring our attention to vedanā . But we’re not attaching to 
neutrality either: we’re not trying to attach to either pleasure 
or pain. So to study vedanā we’re not trying to live a neutral 
existence, but bringing attention to it means that we have to put 
effort into just sitting, standing, walking, lying down; being 
awake, being here and now. We have to pay attention, we have 
to learn to concentrate the mind.
Vedanā conditions taṇhā. So what is taṇhā ? This word is 
translated as ‘desire’ or ‘craving’. It’s when you’re not aware and 
alert to the way things are – then you want, or do not want. 
Starting from vedanā , if it’s pleasurable you want it, if it’s 
painful you don’t want it. Then there’s sensual desire – kāmataṇhā, wanting sensory pleasures, just going around eating 
and drinking, listening to music and living a very distracted 
life of sensual delight. We all know that, don’t we? We’ve all 
also experienced bhava- taṇhā , desire to become, ambition: 
‘I want to become something. I want to become a success; I 
want to become enlightened; I want to become good. I want 
to become admired and respected.’ Or, vibhava- taṇhā, desiring 
to get rid of – that’s a strong one, too: ‘Let’s get rid of all the 
unpleasant things, the bad thoughts, the bad feelings, the pain, 
the imperfections.’
We can observe these three kinds of desires: we can observe 
and reflect on them because they’re objects of the mind; they’re 
mind objects, they’re not the subject. Desire is not you, in

THE W AY IT IS

other words. But out of heedlessness, out of avijjā , it becomes 
a subject, it becomes you. You grasp desire and you become the 
desirer: ‘I want this and I don’t want that. I want to become 
a success, I don’t want to become a failure. I’ve got to get rid 
of these faults.’ So there’s the grasping of desire, and then you 
become somebody who wants things or doesn’t want things. 
And that’s endless.
When we become a person who wants things and doesn’t want 
things, it just goes on and on and on. There’s always something 
we want, something we don’t want. If we don’t watch and 
observe this process, our whole life is just this endless cycle of 
saṁsāra going around and around, just wanting; becoming 
somebody who wants something, becoming somebody who 
doesn’t want something. And that, of course, conditions rebirth, 
jāti. It conditions old age, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, 
pain, grief and despair – depression, misery; ‘ jarāmaraṇaṁ 
soka-parideva-dukkha-domanassupāyāsā.’
T o be somebody who always has to be getting something 
or getting rid of something is such a painful way to live. Just 
contemplate: what is the real suffering in your life? When you 
think you’ve suffered, what is it that you suffered from? It was 
from being somebody who wants things or doesn’t want things. 
We talk about the first Noble Truth, dukkha. We all have this 
suffering. When there’s avijjā we suffer, our life is going to be 
a realm of suffering. This is becoming very obvious in affluent 
Western Europe, in places like America and Australia; affluent 
societies where people get very much what they want, and 
where suffering isn’t the suffering of starvation, deprivation 
and brutality. But in affluent countries there’s so much misery 
and suffering – from what? Wanting and not wanting, because

AJAHN SUMEDHO

even when we get everything we want we want more, and there 
are things that we don’t want.
Just trying to satisfy all our desires and get everything we want 
is not the answer. That’s not the way out of suffering, because 
that process doesn’t end until you see it, until you use vijjā 
rather than avijjā . So contemplate that, this wanting and not 
wanting, desire and the grasping of desire.
When you contemplate vedanā , then you see it’s just natural: 
attraction, repulsion and neither attraction nor repulsion. It’s 
just being sensitive. For example, these flowers in front of me are 
attractive to me right now. That’s just the natural way of things. 
There’s no desire in that. If I contemplate at this moment: ‘I 
don’t want those flowers’, there’s no desire. I don’t want to get 
rid of them either. There’s no wanting or not wanting, but 
they’re still pleasing; their attractiveness is this way. That’s 
vedanā. Or something ugly like these curtains. I find them ugly. 
Whenever I come into this room my mind says, ‘Those curtains 
are ugly’, so I don’t really want to look at them. But I can be 
aware of the displeasure when my eyes contact those curtains 
without desiring to get rid of them; it’s just awareness of their 
unattractiveness. Or the wall, which is neither attractive nor 
unattractive, just a neutral wall.
Reflecting in this way, you see that’s just the natural way of 
things: attraction and aversion, neither attractive nor averse, 
just vedanā. Desire is what we add, like for those flowers: ‘Oh, 
I really want those flowers, I want to have those flowers in my 
room, I’ve got to have those flowers!’ Or the curtains: ‘I wish 
they could get rid of those curtains, they really upset me.’ One 
dwells on wanting to get rid of the curtains, wanting to grab

THE W AY IT IS

the flowers. Of course, one doesn’t even notice the wall unless 
something attractive or unattractive appears on it. And what 
about the space in the room? Space is neither attractive nor 
unattractive, is it?
So contemplate in this way. What is desire? When you’re feeling 
pain in your body, if you reflect on the actual physical sensation 
of pain, you become aware of adding the desire to get rid of it 
to that physical sensation. Notice the actual sensation that you 
have in the body and the aversion to it, the desire to get rid of 
the pain. Notice that the breath doesn’t arouse desire. Maybe 
you have a desire to concentrate your mind, to become one who 
has samādhi or something like that: ‘I want to become a person 
who can attain jhāna .’ But the actual breathing is neither 
attractive, interesting nor unattractive. For most people, the 
idea of attaining jhāna , becoming somebody who can realize 
jhāna is attractive. So we can go about doing ānāpānasati with 
that desire. Or maybe you have a distracted mind – the mind 
wanders, it doesn’t do what you want. You want it concentrated 
on the breath, but every time you start it wanders off. So you 
want to get rid of the distracted mind, you want to become 
someone who has a composed and concentrated mind, not 
someone who has a wandering, distracted mind. That’s vibhavataṇhā, the desire to get rid of the wandering, distracted mind 
by becoming somebody who has a concentrated mind and can 
attain jhānas.
This is a way of reflecting on desire – desire for sense pleasure, 
desire to become, desire to get rid of. If we really contemplate 
and know vedanā exactly through vijjā , through mindfulness 
and wisdom, then we don’t create desire. There’s still the 
pleasure, the pain, the neither-pleasant-nor-painful, but

AJAHN SUMEDHO

things are as they are. This is the suchness, the way things 
are; it’s the Dhamma, the Truth. There’s no suffering when 
things are as they are. Suffering is a result of desire-graspingbecoming ( taṇhā-upādāna-bhava). From there the sequence 
of paṭiccasamuppāda goes on to birth, ageing, death, sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief and despair ( jāti jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparideva-dukkha-domanassupāyāsā). The whole sequence of 
misery follows from taṇhā-upādāna-bhava.
So contemplate this theme of paṭiccasamuppāda during this 
retreat. The desire to get rid of desire is still a trap of the mind. 
Contemplation is not getting rid of, but understanding. This is 
the way of knowing, of vijjā rather than avijjā.

THE W AY IT IS

26   |   DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 5:
LETTING GO OF DESIRE
The arising of dukkha is due to the grasping of desires. And 
the insight is that there is this origin or arising, and that desire 
should be let go of. This is the second Noble Truth; it is the 
insight knowledge of letting go.
Some people think that all I teach is: ‘Whatever happens, let 
go.’ But the teaching involves a real investigation of suffering; 
insight into letting go occurs through that understanding. So 
letting go does not come from a desire to get rid of suffering – 
that is not letting go.
Vibhava-taṇhā, or the desire to get rid of is quite subtle, but 
wanting to get rid of our defilements is another kind of 
desire. Letting go is not a getting rid of or putting down with 
any aversion. Letting go means being able to be with what is 
displeasing without dwelling in aversion, because aversion is 
an attachment. If you have a lot of aversion, you will still be 
attached. Fear, aversion – all this is grasping and clinging.
Dispassion is acceptance and awareness of things as they are; 
not creating anything, letting go of the aversion to what is ugly 
or unpleasant. So ‘letting go’ is not a trick phrase coined as a 
way of dismissing things, but a deep insight into the nature

AJAHN SUMEDHO

of things. Letting go is therefore being able to bear with 
something unpleasant and not be caught up in anger and 
aversion. Dispassion is not depression.
How many of you dismiss and refuse to acknowledge the 
unpleasantness of the functions of your own bodies? There 
are certain functions of the human body that aren’t beautiful, 
that we do not mention in polite society. We use all kinds of 
euphemisms and ways of politely excusing ourselves at the 
appropriate moment, because we do not want the perception 
of ourselves to be connected to those functions. We want our 
presence or image to be connected with something pleasing, 
interesting or attractive. We want our photograph taken with 
flowers in an attractive setting, not on the toilet. We want to 
disguise the natural processes of life, cover up the wrinkles, dye 
the hair, do everything to make ourselves look younger, because 
ageing is not attractive.
As we grow older, we lose what is beautiful and attractive. So, 
on reflection is to be really aware of sickness and death, that 
which is attractive and unattractive; the way things are in this 
realm of sensory consciousness.
Being an entity with sense organs which contact objects – 
they may be anything from the most beautiful and pleasing to 
the most hideous and ugly – we experience feelings. Feeling, 
vedanā, entails the alternatives of the pleasant, the painful and 
the neutral; this applies to all the senses: taste, touch, sight, 
hearing, smell and thought.
So vedanā: I use that particular word, that khandha , as the 
concept for all that attraction/repulsion. We are experiencing 
vedanā, we are aware of the pleasant, painful, beautiful, ugly,

THE W AY IT IS

neutral; through the body or through what we hear, smell, taste, 
touch or think. Even memories can be attractive. We can have 
memories that are pleasing, unpleasant or neutral. And if we are 
heedless and operate from avijjā, self-view, the unquestioned 
assumption that ‘I am’, the attractive, unattractive and neutral 
are interpreted with desire. I want the beautiful, I want the 
pleasant, I want to be happy and successful. I want to be praised, 
I want to be appreciated, I want to be loved. I don’t want to be 
persecuted, unhappy, sick, looked down on or criticized. I don’t 
want ugly things around me. I don’t want to look at the ugly, to 
be around the unpleasant.
Consider the functions of our body. We all know that these 
functions are just part of nature but we don’t want to think 
of them as being ours. I have to urinate, but I would not want 
to be known in history as Sumedho the Urinator. Sumedho 
the Abbot of Amaravati, that’s all right. When I write my 
autobiography, it will be filled with things like the fact that I 
was a disciple of Ajahn Chah, about how sensitive I was as a 
little child, innocent and pure – maybe a little mischievous now 
and then, because I don’t want to be seen as a kewpie doll. But in 
most biographies the unpleasant functions of the body are just 
dismissed. We are not to go round thinking we should identify 
with these functions, but just to begin to notice the tendency 
not to want to be bothered with them, or pay attention to them, 
and observe a lot of what is part of our life, the way things are. 
In mindfulness we open our minds to this, to the whole of life, 
which includes the beautiful, the ugly, the pleasing, the painful 
and the neutral. So in our reflection on the paṭiccasamuppāda, 
we see it is connected to the second Noble Truth.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

This is where the sequence taṇhā-upādāna-bhava is most 
helpful as a means of investigating grasping. Grasping in this 
sense can mean grasping because of attraction or because of 
aversion, trying to get rid of. Grasping with aversion is pushing 
away; running away is upādāna , as is trying to get hold of the 
beautiful, and possess it and keep it – seeking after the desirable, 
trying to get rid of the undesirable.
The more we contemplate and investigate upādāna , the more 
the insight arises: desire should be let go of. In the second Noble 
Truth it is explained that when suffering arises, it should be 
let go of. And then, through the practice of letting go and the 
understanding of what letting go really is, we have the third 
insight into the Noble Truth. Desire has been let go of: we 
actually know letting go. It is not a theoretical letting go, it is 
not a rejection of anything; it is the actual insight.
In discussing the second Noble Truth there are the statements: 
‘There is the origin of suffering’, ‘It should be let go of ’ and the 
third insight: ‘It has been let go of.’ And that is what practice 
is all about – fulfilling those three. That applies to each of the 
Noble Truths: there is the statement, what to do about it and 
then the result of that. The first Noble Truth: there is suffering; 
it should be understood; it has been understood. These are the 
three aspects of insight into the first Noble Truth. The second 
Noble Truth: there is the origin of suffering, samudaya, which 
is the grasping of desire; it should be let go of; it has been let 
go of. The third Noble Truth: there is cessation, nirodha ; it 
should be realized; and the third insight: it has been realized. 
The fourth Noble Truth: there is the Eightfold Path, the way 
out of suffering; it should be developed; it has been developed. 
This is insight knowledge.

THE W AY IT IS

When you think, ‘What does an arahant know?’ it is this: 
they know there is suffering; they know suffering should be 
understood; they know when suffering has been understood; 
they know the origin of suffering, they know it should be let go 
of, knows that it has been let go of, etc.
These are the twelve insights. This is what we call arahantship, 
the knowledge of one who has those insights.
Paṭiccasamuppāda is a really close investigation of the whole 
process. It is grasping of the five khandhā that is the problem. 
The five khandhā are dhammas – they are to be studied and 
investigated. They are just the way things are. They are not a 
self, they are impermanent. And to know this is the way it is is 
to know the Dhamma.
And so the grasping of the conditioned world as a self is 
based on delusion or ignorance ( avijjā), the illusion of a self as 
being the five khandhā. And because of that, we live our lives 
based on ignorance. The volitional activities ( saṅkhārā) from 
that ignorance interpret everything from ‘I am’ and from the 
grasping of desires: the result is jarāmaraṇa, ageing and death. 
If I grasp the body as self, ‘I’ get old. My body is ageing; it’s 
sagging and wrinkly. And the belief that ‘I am getting old’ 
because the body is getting old is a kind of suffering. If there is 
no sense of self, there is no suffering. There is an appreciation 
of the body’s ageing. There is no feeling that there is anything 
wrong with the body getting old; that is what it is supposed to 
do. That is its nature. It is not me. It is not mine, and it is doing 
what it is supposed to do. Perfect, isn’t it? I would be upset if it 
started getting younger – eventually I’d be back in nappies and 
I’d have to go through everything again.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

The thought ‘I am getting old’ isn’t sorrowful. It is a 
conventional way of talking about the body. But if this is what 
I think I am: ‘I am the body, this is my body’, then ignorance 
conditions saṅkhārā and gives rise to many other problems: ‘I’m 
getting old, I want to be young, I want to live a long life, don’t 
you call me an old man, you young whippersnapper!’ Why? 
Because of identifying with the body. And then I am going to 
die. ‘That’s a morbid thing, let’s not even talk about death. Of 
course we are all going to die, but that’s far away.’ When you are 
young you think of death as so far away – ‘Let’s enjoy life.’ But 
when anyone we know dies or we nearly die, death can be very 
frightening. And all that is from attachment to the identity ‘I 
am this body’.
Then, of course, there are all the views, feelings, memories and 
biases we have ( vedanā, saññā, saṅkhārā). We suffer not only 
from identification with the body, but also when we attach 
to the beautiful and to feelings: ‘I want only the beautiful, I 
want only the pleasant, I do not want to see the ugly; I want 
to have beautiful music and no ugly sounds, only fragrant 
smells ....’ We attach to what the world should be like; opinions 
about Britain, France, the USA. Attachments to these views, 
opinions and perceptions make up the vedanā-saññā-saṅkhārā 
sequence of the five khandhā, and we can attach to all that 
in terms of self: ‘It’s my view, what I think, and what I want 
and don’t want, what should be and what should not be.’ 
And from that illusion of self come grief, anguish, despair,
depression, sorrow, lamentation.
The insight into the second Noble Truth is that there is an 
origin to this suffering. It is not permanent. It is not absolutely 
always that something arises. The rising of dukkha is due to the

THE W AY IT IS

grasping of desire. You can see desire because it is a dhamma, it 
arises and ceases. You can see the desire that arises to seek the 
beautiful and pleasant on the sensual plane, through eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, body and mind. Sensual desire is kāma–taṇhā ; it 
always some kind of pleasurable or at least exciting experience. 
Kāma-taṇhā: you can see it in our movement of going towards 
and then grasping the sensory pleasures.
Bhava-taṇhā is the desire to become, it is to do with wanting to 
become something. As we do not ultimately know who we are, 
our desire is to attain and achieve, and become something. In 
this Holy Life the bhava-taṇhā can be very strong. You feel you 
are here to attain and achieve enlightenment. It all sounds very 
good. But even the desire to become enlightened can come from 
this avijjā, from this self-view: ‘I’m going to get enlightened, I’m 
going to become the first American arahant. I’m fed up with 
this world, I want to get enlightened so that I will not have to 
be reborn again. I don’t want to go through childhood again. I 
don’t want any of that. I want to become someone who doesn’t 
have to be born any more.’ That can be bhava-taṇhā/vibhavataṇhā – they go hand in hand. In order to become something, 
you have to get rid of the things you don’t like and don’t want: 
‘I’m going to get rid of my defilements, and I want to get rid of 
my bad habits and get rid of my desires. All this sounds very 
righteous too; the defilements are bad – get rid of them.
So in the Holy Life there is a lot of vibhava-taṇhā. We can live 
this life solely to get rid of things, and to become something by 
getting rid of something. Notice then that the second Noble 
Truth is the realization that desire should be let go of, should be 
laid down. It is not a rejection of desire, but an understanding; 
you let it go, because otherwise it is vibhava-taṇhā, the desire to

AJAHN SUMEDHO

get rid of desire. Know it, see it, but don’t make anything out of 
it. If you are coming from ignorance, your desire says, ‘I want 
to become an enlightened being and I shouldn’t think like that, 
I shouldn’t have the desire to become a Buddha; I shouldn’t 
want to become anything.’ All that can be from ignorance 
conditioning mental formations ( avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā). The 
insight knowledge then is: ‘Desire should be let go of.’
T o say: ‘We shouldn’t be attached to anything’ all sounds very 
right, but that too can be coming from avijjāpaccayā saṅkhārā. 
‘I shouldn’t be attached to anything’ is very much an affirmation 
of myself as somebody who is attached to something and 
shouldn’t be that way, who should be otherwise. So that’s just 
a trap of the mind, not a real insight into kāma-taṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhava-taṇhā. Reflect on what attachment is. If in 
fact you are just throwing things away, that is not the way to 
solve this problem. You are not really examining kāma-taṇhā, 
bhava- taṇhā, vibhava-taṇhā, so you won’t have an insight into 
letting go. You will merely take a position against attachment, 
which is another kind of attachment. So examine, look into 
attachment. This is working in a much more subtle and 
realistic way than just forming an opinion that you shouldn’t
be attached to anything.
I remember a psychiatrist who lived in Bangkok, who used to 
take somebody’s wristwatch. The person would get upset and 
he would say, ‘You are attached to your wristwatch.’ Then he 
would take his own watch and throw it away to prove he was 
not attached. He was bragging about this to me. I said, ‘You 
have missed the point. You are attached to the view that you 
are not attached to your wristwatch.’ Throwing the watch away 
like a smart aleck and saying, ‘You are attached, I’m not, I threw

THE W AY IT IS

mine away’ wasn’t letting go. There was a lot of self in it: ‘Look 
at me – I’m not attached to these wretched material things.’ 
You can be quite proud of being non-attached. With reflection 
we see attachment and we don’t have to get rid of things, but 
we can be not attached to them; we can let go of them, not by 
throwing them out, but by understanding the suffering from 
being attached.
As you understand the peace of non-attachment, of letting 
go, the second Noble Truth leads to the third. When you let 
go of something, you are aware there is no attachment to the 
five khandhā. There is awareness that desire has been let go of. 
Then the insight into the third Noble Truth of cessation arises. 
There is cessation. Cessation should be realized. As we realize 
cessation more and more, we begin to notice non-attachment.
Not many of you are aware of non-attachment. You are usually 
conscious through being attached to things. A totally deluded 
human being only feels alive through attachment and desire. 
Contemplate that when you are not caught up in attachment to 
the five khandhā, you do not feel alive, you are nobody.
Having neurotic problems makes people feel interesting and 
alive: ‘I have fascinating neuroses from all kinds of traumas 
in early childhood.’ So it’s not Sumedho the Urinator, it’s
Sumedho the Interesting Neurotic, the Mystic, or Sumedho 
the Abbot – these are conditions to which we can be attached. 
But realizing cessation allows you to let the self cease. There 
is letting go. The realization of letting go is cessation, that 
whatever arises ceases. And cessation is noted. Cessation
should be realized.
So our practice is one of realizing cessation. That is when we 
talk about emptiness: we realize the empty mind where there is

AJAHN SUMEDHO

no self. There is no sense of the mind being anybody. As soon 
as you think of it as ‘my’ mind, if you grasp that thought you 
are deluded again. But even if you have ‘my mind’ and see it as 
that which arises and ceases, with non-grasping of it, then it is 
just a condition. There is no suffering from that, it is peaceful.
When there is no self, there is peace. When there are ‘me’ 
and ‘mine’ there is no peace. Worry, anxiety, what are they? 
They all come from ‘me’ and ‘mine’. When you let go there 
is cessation of ‘me’ and ‘mine’. There is peace, calm, clarity,
dispassion, emptiness.
I observe that when there is no self, no attachment, the way of 
relating to others is through the brahmavihāras , the Divine 
Abodes: mettā, kindness; karuṇā , compassion; muditā , 
sympathetic joy; and upekkhā , serenity. These are not from 
a self or avijjā . It is not that there’s an idea that, ‘I must have 
more mettā for everyone, because I have a lot of aversion and 
I shouldn’t – I should have loving-kindness for all beings. 
I should feel compassion. Sometimes I just want to kill 
everybody, but I should feel a lot of mettā, muditā, be kind and 
joyful and sympathetic with people. I should be serene, too.’ 
However, the desire to become someone who has lots of mettā 
and kāruṇa and all that kind of thing is still bhava-taṇhā . But 
as the illusions of self fall away, this is the natural way to relate. 
You do not become a vacuous zombie through understanding 
Dhamma. You still relate to each other, but through kindness, 
compassion, sympathetic joy and serenity, rather than through 
greed, hatred and delusion.
What do unselfish human beings generally manifest in society? 
You could explain mettā, muditā, karuṇā and upekkhā as

THE W AY IT IS

energies that manifest through unselfish human beings. 
Then apply that to our own practice now. When there is 
vijjā, knowing and seeing clearly, that gives full opportunity 
for the practice of kindness, compassion and the rest. But it 
is not me, not mine, not Sumedho the mettā -filled Ajahn, 
Sumedho the Good Guy rather than Sumedho the Urinator. 
As soon as Sumedho- delusions step aside and cease, kindness, 
compassion, sympathetic joy and serenity can manifest. This 
is why the human state is a great blessing: when the self-view is 
relinquished, what remains is a great blessing. But it’s not me. 
‘I’ am not a great blessing. All I can do in this conventional self 
is let go of delusion, be mindful and not get attached to things, 
see clearly – that is what I can do.
That is the practice of the Four Noble Truths and development 
of the Eightfold Path. It amounts to being vigilant, mindful, 
seeing things clearly. Then what happens is up to other things. 
There is no need to go around trying to become Sumedho the 
Good Guy any more. Goodness can manifest through this form 
if there is no delusion; and that is not a personal achievement or 
attainment at all, merely the way things are, the way it happens 
to be. It is Dhamma.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

THE SHINING THROUGH:  |   27
OF THE DIVINE   
What is divinity? We may have a vision of a human being as 
instinctive, because we have an animal body with the same 
instinctive nature as an animal. Survival and procreation are 
just as strong instincts in us as they are in cats, dogs and rabbits. 
But there is also the divine. This is something that we rise up 
to or turn to; because it’s not instinctive, it won’t be something 
we’ll find unless we deliberately seek it.
For reflection on divinity we have the four brahmavihāras, 
the beautiful, selfless qualities that can manifest through the 
human form when there’s no self. When you’re not caught 
in instinctive behaviour or emotional reactions based on 
ignorance; when there’s dispassion and the whole process of 
self-view ceases, divinity becomes obvious. Then kindness, 
compassion, sympathetic joy and serenity of mind are not 
qualities we have to get, but qualities that manifest through 
these human forms.
In our lives as separate, individual beings we relate to things; 
we have to meet and contact and react or respond to objects all 
the time throughout our lives. On the physical level we have 
to respond to each other’s presence in some way, by ignoring, 
embracing, paying respects or cursing. In relationships, when

THE W AY IT IS

there’s no self, there is a divinity that manifests. Thus you can 
see that the human form is a form for the divine.
On the other hand, we can think we live just for ourselves: ‘It’s 
my life and I can do what I want, I have the right to happiness’ 
and all that kind of selfishness. If we don’t rise above the animal 
mentality, we can live very much by following our instincts or 
emotions. Or we can live in a world of ideas, of attachment to 
ideas of how things should be – which is a major problem in the 
Western world. But as you penetrate that and see the suffering 
that comes from grasping anything at all, as that insight brings 
about letting go and non-attachment, there’s a response to the 
way things are that can be divided into the four categories of 
the brahmavihāras.
Mettā, karuṇā, muditā, and upekkhā provide a reflection: they 
form a sequence of how to relate to the human realm, to the 
animal kingdom and to nature. Mettā is very much how we 
should relate to ourselves, too. It’s how to relate to ourselves 
with kindness and acceptance, rather than with aversion and 
judgement. Mettā implies accepting something that may not 
be very nice, such as physical pain, or things that aren’t very 
nice about your body or your character. Maybe you have a lot 
of fears or bad temper, or something similar. If you have mettā, 
that means you can accept those things for what they are. You’re 
not judging them or condemning them from an ignorant, self- 
conscious position. You’re aware of them as painful, unpleasant, 
or ugly – but mettā practice is the ability to accept patiently the 
flaws, pain, irritations and frustrations within our minds and 
bodies, and the unpleasant and annoying things that impinge 
on them from outside. This is because with mettā such things

AJAHN SUMEDHO

are no longer seen as personal; there’s no me and you, no ‘You’ve 
done this to me’ or ‘I’ve done this to you.’
Mettā is about having perspective and not creating a problem 
even about unfairnesses, injustices, inadequacies and so forth 
in ourselves, others or society. This doesn’t mean that we don’t 
notice or can’t see them, but it means we don’t make problems 
about them. We don’t carry them around in our minds with 
bitterness, resentment, anger and destructive tendencies. With 
mettā, there’s always the ability to forgive and start anew, to 
recognize the way things are and not expect everything to fit 
our ideals regarding how things should be. This doesn’t mean 
that we fatalistically resign ourselves to mediocrity, tyranny or 
stupidity, but that we aren’t caught in the pattern of ignorance 
conditioning mind formations. Thus we can bear with the 
vicissitudes of life with kindness and acceptance.
Then there’s karuṇā, compassion. When we see the suffering of 
others and the injustices and unfairness that exist, we respond 
with compassion, but not like a wealthy person feeling sorry for 
the poor. That’s not it. It’s not looking down on the poor, not 
patronizing or feeling sorry for people, but understanding the 
predicament of our human condition and all that goes with it. 
It’s from understanding the nature of suffering, how it arises 
and ceases, that you can have true karuṇā for other beings. 
The British have a lot of karuṇā for animals. Britain is quite 
an impressive country, when you think how much wildlife 
there is in this densely populated area of southern England. 
That’s a good quality, karuṇā. Britain is a kind country, where 
people generally have developed compassion – concern for the 
unfortunate and the underprivileged.

THE W AY IT IS

When we moved to Chithurst, there were people who didn’t 
want us there; but most of the local people tried to be fair. In 
other words, they had a certain measure of compassion for us. 
They would not have harmed us or tried to get rid of us, even 
though they may have preferred a nice Christian monastery 
or a nice, proper upper-class family to buy Chithurst House, 
a family who would keep horses and play polo. That would 
have been more in line with the general mood of West Sussex 
because people like what they’re used to. But because mettā/
karuṇā were already developed, only a few people were directly 
hostile or wanted to take action against us. So one can regard 
this as mettā/karuṇā.
Sometimes in Theravada Buddhism one gets the impression 
that one shouldn’t enjoy beauty. If you see a beautiful flower 
you should contemplate its decay, or if you see a beautiful 
woman, you should contemplate her as a rotting corpse. This 
has a certain value on one level, but it’s not a fixed position to 
take. It’s not that we should feel compelled to reject beauty, 
and dwell on its impermanence and on how it changes to being 
not so beautiful, and then downright repulsive. That’s a good 
reflection on anicca, dukkha and anattā, but it can leave the 
impression that beauty is only to be reflected on in terms of these 
three characteristics, rather than in terms of the experience of 
beauty. This is the joy of muditā – being able to appreciate the 
beauty in the things around us.
Flowers are a lot prettier than we are. We admit they’re prettier, 
we expect them to be; we don’t envy them their beauty. But we 
might really hate somebody else for being beautiful, because 
then it’s a threat. Somebody else’s beauty makes me look not so 
beautiful. This is to be observed, not to try to force a kind of

AJAHN SUMEDHO

false happiness onto the situation, but to let these things cease 
in your mind. T o be clearly aware of this particular problem is 
to stay with it and not make a problem about it from the selfview. Recognize it as anicca, dukkha, anattā; let it cease; let go 
of it. Then, in that letting go, we find a rejoicing in the talents, 
the goodness and the beauty of other beings.
When you look at flowers you experience a joyful feeling, 
and that’s muditā – you’re rejoicing in or glad at the beauty 
of something. Maybe you’ve never reflected like that. We see 
beautiful things in nature, and because they’re no threat to us 
or anything else, we can rejoice in the sunset or the beauty of 
trees and mountains and rivers. So that’s muditā : a rejoicing 
in beauty, goodness and truth. And we rejoice in the goodness 
of others. When somebody does something good or you hear 
about some noble action, heroic effort or self-sacrifice, a sense 
of muditā arises. That’s joy, sympathetic joy.
But we tend to fall short of this when it becomes a matter of 
‘you’ and ‘me’. We can be very jealous of somebody’s health and 
beauty if we are caught in the self-view. We might feel joy at 
the flowers in the garden, but then go to a neighbour’s house 
where the flowers are more beautiful than ours. We might feel 
envy because from a self-position it’s, ‘Her flowers look better 
than mine, and she is more beautiful than I am’; or, ‘He is better 
looking than I am’; or, ‘He is more intelligent’; or, ‘He has a 
better personality.’ So we suffer from envy and jealousy. It’s a 
very common problem; in fact, many human beings are really 
stuck in envy and jealousy.
If one were to go to a rich person’s house, with beautiful 
grounds, a swimming pool, beautiful oriental carpets and 
lovely furnishings, a selfless person might rejoice at being in a

THE W AY IT IS

beautiful place. Or, one might think, ‘Hum, wealthy people, 
probably got rich from cheating the poor and ripping off the 
underprivileged ... grumble, grumble, grumble.’
I remember once going into a beautiful church in London 
with somebody. I said, ‘Oh, what a lovely church.’ He said, 
‘Yeah, it was probably at the expense of all those colonies the 
British exploited.’ But I wasn’t commenting on history, but 
experiencing the gladness of being in a beautiful place. And 
yet we can think that maybe that church was built out of the 
slave trade or the opium trade. Perhaps slave traders and drug 
traffickers centuries ago felt guilty, so they built a magnificent 
church in London. But that doesn’t mean that it’s not beautiful. 
We’re not judging it on the moral plane, but reflecting on the 
joy, on the experience of beauty, goodness, and truth: these are 
what bring joy into our lives. People who can’t see the beauty of 
the good or the true are really bitter and mean at heart; they live 
in an ugly realm where there’s no rejoicing in beauty, goodness 
and truth.
T o rejoice in these things doesn’t mean that we get carried away 
with them; the experience of joy no longer occurs if we indulge 
in beauty and try to grasp it, or if we hold on to the experience 
of joy to try to have it all the time. But muditā is certainly a 
part of our human experience. Muditā is our ability to be 
joyful with the beauty and loveliness of life’s experiences. It is 
the sense of joy and appreciation and gratitude for the beauties 
and the lovely things of life, the lovely things in other people. 
So when there’s no self, then there’s joy; we find joy in the 
goodness, the beauty of the people around us, or in society or 
natural conditions. Once you have insight, you find you enjoy, 
delight, in the beauty and the goodness of things. Truth, beauty 
and goodness delight us: in them we find joy. That is muditā.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

But if you see beauty as something to grasp, it arouses desire. 
You see beautiful human beings, a beautiful woman or man, 
and you think, ‘I want.’ That’s desire. It’s not rejoicing in the 
beauty of someone; it is the desire to possess, control, and get 
something for yourself out of it. At the level of instinct, that’s 
the way it is. It’s natural enough. If we didn’t find each other 
attractive, no one would want to perpetuate the species. If 
sexual activities were painful and miserable, nobody would 
want to do them, and if we found each other totally repulsive 
and ugly, we wouldn’t want to get close to each other, not to 
mention anything as intimate as sex. Desire is the natural way 
on that level of the sensory realm. There’s nothing wrong with 
it, but there is the possibility for a human being to transcend 
it. If desire was all we were and all we could do, we should 
always follow it. But because we can transcend it, we have this 
connection to the divine; we can rise above the coarse instinctive 
nature of our own bodies and the animal realm.
And that’s what I’m pointing to; I’m not condemning the 
animal realm. Animals can bring us a lot of joy. Down at 
Chithurst recently I spent the day with Doris, our cat, and I 
have always felt she brought me a lot of joy. She’s a very pleasant 
animal. If I got attached to her, however, I’d say, ‘I’ve got to 
have Doris. I’ve got to bring Doris here to Amaravati. I can’t 
live without her.’ Then I’d drag her up here and she would have 
to fight with the cats who live here. And it would all be just for 
me, just so I could get what I wanted. That wouldn’t be a joyful 
experience any more. It would cause a lot of problems.
We can reflect on how things affect us. Always to want muditā 
– the beautiful flowers, the waterfalls and the beautiful birds 
singing means that you can’t rejoice in them any more, because 
you’re trying to hold on. You’re trapped in all kinds of views

THE W AY IT IS

and opinions about them, so that even if you’re in the midst 
of them you’re not really enjoying them, rejoicing in them any 
more, because you’ve been separated from them through your 
desire for them.
In our life as samaṇas ,10 contemplating nature, contemplating 
the Dhamma, we don’t have to think that all beauty is just there 
to corrupt us and give us another rebirth. That’s another selfview. But be aware of how beauty affects you. When you see 
a beautiful woman or a handsome man, how does that affect 
your mind? There may be an initial attraction, and then you 
can easily start to feel threatened and reject the person because 
we have a life of celibacy. Or you might give a second glance 
and dally with the sexual thoughts that might arise from that 
eye contact. But the more you are mindful, the less you tend to 
follow things as desire, the less you tend to create or add to the 
feelings with desire and attachment. When you’re mindful, you 
don’t do that.
Enlightenment doesn’t mean a kind of bland indifference. 
Sometimes enlightenment is made to sound as if it means 
becoming emotionless zombies, people who don’t feel anything 
any more. Well, as long as there’s self, what we would call joy 
tends to be tinged with selfishness; it becomes stained with 
our selves. We become jealous if we have something beautiful 
and somebody else has something more beautiful, because 
selfishness always turns beauty into possessiveness. If the 
beauties of life, the joy of truth and beauty and goodness, are 
coming from self, they’re always corrupted with jealousy, envy 
and begrudging people. So if there’s selfishness, even being the 
most beautiful of all is not really a joyful experience, because 
10. Samaṇa: a renunciant contemplative, a monk or nun.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

you are always worried that someone else might claim that 
crown. If you adopt a self- view, there’s always that possibility. 
But when there’s no self, beauty doesn’t belong to anyone. It’s 
not mine or yours; we realize there’s no possibility of possessing 
it anyway, so there’s no desire to possess.
So there can be the joy of the experience of beauty, without it 
being corrupted by selfishness.
Then upekkhā: equanimity, serenity. T o be able to abide in 
serenity of the mind, we’re not going around looking for 
beautiful things to find delight in, because there’s no self. You 
respond to beauty with joy, but it’s not something that you look 
for or seek as a person any more. So the ordinariness of life is 
upekkhā, is serenity. It’s about having peacefulness with the 
pains and aches of the ageing process and separation from the 
loved. All this is the realization of upekkhā , of serenity.
Upekkhā doesn’t mean indifference. Sometimes it’s translated 
as ‘indifference’ but it actually means serenity when things are 
ugly, unpleasant or ordinary. If you follow the asubha practices, 
noticing, paying attention to the unbeautiful, the not-beautiful, 
you begin to create upekkhā, equanimity or serenity.
There was a hospital in Bangkok which received all the murder 
victims and violent deaths, corpses found in the canals and 
things like that. If you went in on a Monday they would have 
a collection from the weekend, a variety of gruesome, macabre 
objects that would first give you a strong feeling of revulsion. 
You’d go in and say, ‘Yuk! Let me out of here!’ because we 
don’t generally like to look at human bodies that have been 
butchered and mangled, and are in a state of decay. Such things 
are what civilized society always keeps away from. We have

THE W AY IT IS

institutions to take care of them, so they never have to meet 
our attention. But if one meditates on these things, the result 
is actually equanimity or serenity. If you get over the initial 
aversion, horror and negativity towards a rotting human corpse 
or a human corpse that’s been cut up in an autopsy, the result 
is equanimity – a tremendous peacefulness and serenity. Not 
depression. Not aversion. When there’s no self, one can abide 
in a state of serenity. If there’s self, then we say, ‘I hate it, I don’t 
like it, take it away, I can’t stand it. I can’t bear this. It’s foul, it’s 
disgusting.’ But when there is equanimity, actually, there is no 
self, so one is not making problems about the process of living, 
and the way things move and change and go from beauty to 
decay. With muditā you find joy in the beauty, and when the 
beauty fades there’s equanimity rather than sorrow.
Upekkhā is actually is the ability not to follow aversion or be 
carried away when you see beautiful things. So we’re not just 
running around trying to rejoice in beauty, or trying to feel 
karuṇā for every unfortunate creature. We can let ourselves 
wait when there’s nothing much happening. With upekkhā 
one does not have to seek something to become happy about 
or some cause to fight for, or engage in the compulsive activity 
that’s another great problem for modern humanity – we try to 
use up our need for restless activity in good causes, instead of 
being always involved in activities because there’s no upekkhā.
Traditionally, the brahmavihāras are considered as lokiya 
dhamma, mundane Dhamma, not the transcendent or lokuttara 
dhamma. Because of the way the mind tends to think, the 
view arises that they’re not worth bothering with: ‘ Lokuttara 
dhammā are the important ones. You don’t pay much attention 
to lokiya dhammas.’ But with mindfulness you’re with the

AJAHN SUMEDHO

relationship of the lokiya to the lokuttara dhamma. We relate 
on the lokiya dhamma level through the brahmavihāras – 
mettā, karuṇā, muditā and upekkhā. When there’s no self, 
when there’s no ignorance conditioning the mental formations, 
then there is the way of things, the lokiya dhammas . But we’re 
not asking muditā to be a permanent experience. We are not 
expecting to have a continuous, absolute, eternal experience of 
rejoicing and joy in our lives, because we are not attached to 
that as a viewpoint.
So the brahmavihāras represent a spontaneous response to 
the experience of birth and consciousness when there’s no 
self. They’re a spontaneous response from selflessness, from 
anattā, rather than an impulsive reaction from desire. There’s 
a difference between a spontaneous response to wisdom and 
mindfulness and an impulsive reaction to desire. The difference 
lies in that view of a self. In the self- view one is still grasping, 
just reacting impulsively with desire to life’s impingements 
and experiences. When there’s no more ignorance, there’s 
spontaneity. That’s what spontaneity is. There’s no self in it. It’s 
just a more and more natural way to respond to beauty, truth 
and virtue; or to pain and misery; or to winter, spring, summer 
and autumn; to the fortunate beings or the unfortunate ones; 
and even to the waiting, holding your cup of tea, looking 
out of the window at the rain. This is just a contemplation
of what divinity is.
If you reflect on the instinctive nature, the earthbound body, 
its sexual desires, its reproductive abilities, survival, eating, 
drinking, sleeping, all these basic instinctive necessities, there’s 
nothing bad about them; they’re just the way a form like this 
survives. It has to reproduce itself. In fact, human beings are

THE W AY IT IS

becoming too good at reproducing themselves. It’s rather 
frightening. How many billions is the world population? Six 
billion and rising on this planet? And if they were all just like 
animals, just operating out of instinct, they would be several 
billion selfish, undeveloped, neurotic, screwed-up human 
beings. It’s terribly frightening. Or take it to the opposite 
extreme – several billion enlightened human beings – now, that 
might not be so bad! Several billion enlightened human beings 
rather than several billion ignorant, selfish human beings; 
several billion human beings who can manifest the divine in 
their daily lives, through mettā, karuṇā, muditā, upekkhā . 
That doesn’t sound so bad – it sounds rather nice. But several 
billion human beings manifesting greed, hatred and delusion is 
a pretty grim picture. Yet we don’t have the right to comment 
on them: this one here, this is what we have, this is what we can 
work on. Don’t worry about the others. This is what you can 
develop through reflection and through meditation.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

A TIME TO LOVE  |   28   
With the emphasis Buddhists place on reflection, mindfulness 
and wisdom, the Holy Life might sometimes seem to be an 
almost unfeeling attempt to look at everything in very objective 
ways. Rather than feel things, we’re supposed to see everything 
as anicca, dukkha and anattā. That’s how it might seem. But 
remember that the heartfelt experience of life is a loving one, so 
love and devotion are not to be dismissed.
If we’re looking at the experience of love as just anicca, dukkha 
and anattā, that might seem cold-hearted. Objectivity, however, 
is merely a way of having things in perspective, so that love is 
not something that blinds us. If we’re attached to the idea of 
love, we can be quite blind to its reality. We can become very 
inspired by talking about it or meditating on it – seeking it in 
others, demanding it or feeling somehow left out. But what 
is love in terms of our lives as we live them? On an emotional 
plane you might want to have feelings of tremendous oneness, 
or maybe aim the feelings at some particular person, wanting to 
have a special, loving relationship with another person. Or love 
can be abstract – love of all human beings, love of all beings, 
love of God, love of something or some concept.
Devotion is from the heart; it’s not a rational thing. You can’t 
make yourself feel love or devotion just because you like the idea

THE W AY IT IS

of it. It’s when you’re not attached, when your heart is open, 
receptive and free, that you begin to experience what pure love 
is. Loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, equanimity 
– the realm of the Divine Abodes, the brahmavihāras – these 
come from an empty mind; not from a sterile position of just 
annihilating feeling, but from a heart that is not deluded, not 
blinded by ideas of self or others, or by passions of some kind 
or another.
You may think the Holy Life is cold and heartless, because in 
a community of samaṇas such as this, living according to a 
way of restraint and discipline, we’re not demonstrative in our 
expressions of love and joy. This community does not bubble 
with feelings of devotion. It is quite formal and restrained in 
its form and expression. But this does not necessarily deny love. 
With mindfulness, with the way we relate – to our own bodies, 
to the Sangha, to the laypeople, to the tradition and to society 
– there is openness, kindness, and receptivity. There is caring, a 
joyfulness and compassion that we can feel. It is still anicca and 
anattā, and it is dukkha in the sense that it’s not in itself the end 
of anything; it’s not satisfying as an identity or an attachment. 
But when the heart is free from illusions of self, a loving quality 
arises in the pure joy of being. It’s not expected to be anything 
or anybody, nor is it expected to last or be permanent. It is not 
to be made into anything. It’s just the natural way of things. So 
when you contemplate in that way, that is the way of faith and 
trust and devotion.
Faith, confidence and trust are nothing you can really grasp. 
Faith is not anything that you can create. You can say the 
words, but really to have faith and confidence in Dhamma 
is to be willing to let go of any demand or affirmation or any

AJAHN SUMEDHO

attachment whatsoever. And that experience of faith comes 
to us as we examine and understand the Dhamma, or the 
true way of things. If we really contemplate Dhamma, see 
Dhamma, then there is faith, this strong sense of total trust,
confidence in truth.
If you’re practising vipassanā meditation and becoming more 
frightened, anxious or tense, or feeling emotionally sterilized, 
you’re not doing it the right way. Perhaps you are using a 
technique as a way of suppressing your feelings or denying 
things, so you end up feeling more tense, sceptical, uncertain. 
There is an attachment to some view about it. The more we 
really see and completely understand the way things are, the 
more we have this quality of faith. Faith increases, it’s total 
trust. When one talks about surrender, giving up or letting go, 
it’s through total trust. It is not just taking a chance or a risk, it 
is through the experience of faith.
The path is something we cultivate. We have to know where we 
are and not try to become something that we think we would 
like to be; we have to practise with the way it is now, without 
making a judgement about it. If you’re feeling tense, nervous, 
disillusioned, disappointed about yourself, the tradition, the 
teacher, the monks or nuns, or whatever, try to recognize that 
what is in the moment is enough. Be willing just to admit, to 
acknowledge the way it is, rather than indulging in believing 
that what you’re feeling is an accurate description of reality, or 
thinking that what you are feeling is wrong and you shouldn’t 
be feeling like that. Those are two extremes, but the cultivation 
of the Way is to recognize that whatever is subject to arising is 
subject to ceasing. And this isn’t a put-down or a cold-hearted 
way of cultivating the path, even though it might sound like it.

THE W AY IT IS

You might think you just have to let go of all your feelings and 
see that the love in your heart is just anicca, dukkha, anattā. You 
feel love for the Buddha and you think: ‘Oh, that’s just anicca, 
dukkha, anattā. That’s all it is!’ You feel love for the teacher 
and you think: ‘That’s just anicca, dukkha, anattā . Don’t 
get attached to the teacher!’ You feel love for the tradition: 
‘anicca, dukkha, anattā , don’t get attached to traditions or 
techniques.’ Not getting attached to anything can be merely 
a way of suppressing everything. It’s not necessarily letting 
go or non- attachment, it can be merely a position you take, 
and if you take that position and operate from it, all you’re 
going to feel is negativity, stress. ‘You shouldn’t be attached 
to anything, you shouldn’t love anything, you shouldn’t feel 
anything – feeling anything is just anicca, dukkha, anattā .’ 
That means you’re just taking the words and using them on 
your mind like a bludgeon, a big club. You’re not reflecting,
watching, observing, opening, trusting.
Mettā as the practice of loving-kindness, is one of the beautiful 
devotional practices that are highly recommended in BuddhaDhamma. As human beings we’re warm-blooded creatures. 
We do feel love, that is part of our humanity. We like each 
other, we like to be with other people, we like to be kind; we 
find enjoyment in cooking food and giving it to other people. 
We enjoy helping. You can see that with the custom of dāna , 
generosity in the Asian communities. When Sri Lankan people 
come here with their curries, they light up with the joy of giving. 
That’s a very good quality. It’s beautiful to see somebody who 
maybe has been up all night preparing delicious food to offer 
to somebody else – they’re not cooking it for themselves. Well, 
what is that as a human experience? Is it defilement, or is it

AJAHN SUMEDHO

being attached to feeling delight or happiness at doing things 
for others? This is the beauty of humanity – just being able to 
love, to give, to share, to be generous.
Try contemplating what the great delight of being the richest 
person in the world would be. What would be the truly 
delightful thing about it? T o get what I want? No, it would be 
the opportunity to give it away. That would be the true delight 
of being rich and wealthy – so that you could give it away as 
dāna. Whereas to be rich and not be able to give it away would 
be a real burden. What a burden that would be, to be the richest 
man in the world, and be selfish and hold onto all my wealth 
and keep it all to myself!
The joy of wealth is in one’s ability to share it and give it, 
without any kind of corrupt intentions or selfish demands. So 
this is what is lovely about our humanity: we can experience 
this joy of giving. And it’s something we all experience when 
we really give something, when we help somebody without any 
selfish request or demand for something in return. Then we 
experience joy.
It is certainly a lovely human experience – but we don’t expect it 
to make us joyful for the rest of our lives. The joy of generosity 
and kindness isn’t permanent, doesn’t make us permanently 
happy, but we don’t expect it to. If we did it wouldn’t be dāna 
any longer, it would be a deal we were making. It wouldn’t be 
an act of generosity, it would be buying something. Real joy 
comes from giving and not caring whether anyone even knows 
or acknowledges it.
As soon as the self comes in – for example, ‘I’m giving this dāna 
to you and it is very important that you know who’s giving it.

THE W AY IT IS

ME, I’m giving it!’ – the amount of joy that comes from giving 
is probably very minimal. If I’m so concerned about being 
recognized and appreciated, that you should appreciate my 
generosity and my goodness, that becomes a joyless state of 
mind. One cannot feel happy or have real joyfulness in living 
if there is attachment to the idea that one’s actions should be 
recognized. There’s nothing wrong with people appreciating 
somebody else’s goodness and generosity, but when we don’t 
demand it, there is joy.
Romantic love is usually based on the illusion of a self and a 
demand for something back. Spiritual love is altruistic love or 
universal love and is represented by the brahmavihāras – mettā, 
karuṇā, muditā and upekkhā. Such love is a unitive experience. 
It brings together, it unites. It is a communion. Hatred is the 
experience of separation. When we hate there’s no union, 
communion, or oneness. Hatred is separative, divisive, and 
discriminatory. Love is unitive, and we want unity because 
living in a world of hate, discrimination and separation is 
a miserable hell-realm. The community is a communion, a 
Sangha, a whole. If we’re divorced from the sangha, if we hate 
the sangha: ‘Hate this nun, hate that monk – and I don’t like 
that, don’t like this’, then this is not a community, it’s a disunity. The feeling is one of alienation, separation, emphasizing 
me and you and your faults and my feelings, and my anger at 
your faults. Or it can be my emphasizing the things that are 
wrong with you – things that are wrong with the monks, with 
the nuns, with the anagārikas; things that are wrong, full stop. 
And attaching to those perceptions will make me feel alienated, 
separated, angry, discontented, unhappy and depressed.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

Sometimes the mind will go into a very negative state where 
all you feel is annoyance. Nothing people do seems quite good 
enough. When you’re in that mood everything seems wrong 
– the cats, the sun, the moon – the mind goes into division, 
separation and negativity. You feel separate from everything 
you see, and no communion or union is possible as long as you 
are identified with and attached to that attitude of mind. When 
you are in a loving mood, it doesn’t really matter if somebody 
isn’t feeling very good or is not doing exactly what they should. 
There are always little things, little bits and pieces that aren’t 
quite what they should be. But when you’re in a loving mood 
these things aren’t so important. The loving experience comes 
because you’re willing to overlook the personality differences 
and the discrimination that exist in the conditioned realm for 
the feeling of communion, of union, of oneness. We unite as 
brothers and sisters in a common experience of old age, sickness 
and death, rather than pointing out the differences or who’s 
better than whom.
When we take refuge in Sangha, we’re taking refuge in 
supaṭipanno11 (those who have practised well), ujupaṭipanno 
(those who have practised directly), ñāyapaṭipanno (those 
who have practised insightfully), sāmīcipaṭipanno (those 
who practise with integrity). Rather than taking refuge in 
Americans, British, Australians, or in men or women, or nuns 
or monks, we take refuge in those who practise the Dhamma – 
in the good, the direct, and the sincere.
We have tendencies towards both union and separation, and 
we can be mindfully aware of this. The way things are has 
11. These terms form part of the daily chanting in honour of the Sangha.

THE W AY IT IS

to be recognized as Dhamma. There is uniting and there is 
separating, and with clear awareness one does not identify with 
either extreme. There’s a time for union, communion, a time for 
non-discrimination, for devotion, for gratitude, for generosity, 
for joy. But there’s also time for separation and discrimination, 
for examining what’s wrong. There is a need to look at the flaws; 
to look at anger, jealousy and fear, and to accept and understand 
those emotional experiences, rather than judging them and 
taking them as self and as something we shouldn’t have. This 
is what being human is all about: we’re born into a separate 
form and yet we can unite. We can realize unity, community, 
oneness, but we can also discriminate.
So refuge in the Buddha is the ability of a human being to 
recognize both sides and respond appropriately. We can look 
at the flaws and the problems of life as part of our human 
experience, rather than in a personal way. Then we are no longer 
proliferating; nor are we magnifying or exalting, obsessed with 
what’s wrong, because we have this perspective of unity and 
separation. This is the way things are, the Dhamma.
Is being a Buddhist monk or a Buddhist nun a denial of love? 
Is the Vinaya-discipline merely a means of suppressing feelings? 
It can be just that. We can use Vinaya-discipline and monastic 
tradition as merely a way of avoiding things. Maybe the monks 
are just frightened of women. Maybe the nuns are petrified of 
men, so they become nuns and don’t have to face their fears 
and anxieties with regard to relationships with men. Of course, 
many worldly people think like that. They think we’re all here 
because of an inability to cope with the real world.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

But is that really how it is? If it is, if that’s why you’re a monk 
or nun, then you’re in this way for the wrong reasons. It is not 
an instrument for avoiding reality and life, but for reflecting 
on them, because in restraint and the dignity of restraint, the 
way of monasticism is an expression of love for all beings, 
men, women, both inside and outside. We no longer choose 
one person on whom to focus our attention and devotion, but 
devote ourselves to all beings.
I realize that if I were a family man, I would have to give my 
whole attention to my wife, children and immediate family. 
That’s the result of family life and what marriage is about. They 
have priority. You have to relate to your marriage partner and 
those for whom you are responsible. Or one can be an almsmendicant and live on faith alone, on trust in the goodness 
and benevolence of other beings, because one feels love and 
respect for all beings. That love and respect are what generate 
the alms that sustain us in this life as alms-mendicants. And 
the funny thing is that the power of the Buddhist Sangha is 
so strong that even if you personally hate all other beings, the 
alms still come in. The power of the robe seems to be so strong 
that you will still be fed by kind-hearted beings. This is because 
of the pāramī of the Buddha. That doesn’t mean you should 
develop hatred or justify it in yourself in any way. Rather, it’s 
a reflection on the power of a very skilful convention that was 
established by the Lord Buddha. When you appreciate that
you really feel love and trust.
Why do these monasteries here in England work? Why should 
they work in a non-Buddhist country? Why should anybody 
want to mail a cheque, bring a sack of potatoes or prepare a 
meal? Why should they bother? This is because of the pāramī

THE W AY IT IS

of the Buddha. The goodness of the lifestyle he established 
generates generosity. The loving-kindness, the compassion 
and joy of the Holy Life reach out and open other people to 
that same experience. It is a mystery. From a practical, worldly 
attitude of justifying our existence in the eyes of society, we 
don’t seem to do all that much for anyone. Many people think 
we just sit here and try to become enlightened for ourselves, 
have nice, pleasant mental states, because we can’t stand the real 
world. But the more you contemplate this life and understand 
it, the more you realize the power of the goodness, the faith, the 
pāramī of the Buddha, which allow communion to take place 
in an interconnection of goodness. It needn’t be demonstrated, 
talked about and emphasized a lot.
It speaks for itself. We don’t have to go out telling people: ‘You 
should give us alms because we are practising the Dhamma 
and we are disciples of the Buddha.’ Our requisites are offered 
because people appreciate and respect the Holy Life. It brings 
joy and happiness into people’s lives, because we rejoice in the 
beauty of others and in the goodness and benevolence of this 
experience of living.
So the Holy Life is actually a strange way to live. In terms of 
what we regard as reality according to our cultural conditioning, 
quite how it works is a mystery. But as Dhamma, as Truth, as the 
way things are, it actually works. And this increases our faith, 
and our trust in the Refuges and in the beauty and goodness of 
our lives as samaṇas.

AJAHN SUMEDHO

REFLECTIONS ON  |   28
BENEVOLENCE   
May I abide in well-being,
in freedom from affliction,
in freedom from hostility,
in freedom from ill will,
in freedom from anxiety,
and may I maintain well-being in myself.
May everyone abide in well-being,
in freedom from hostility,
in freedom from ill will
in freedom from anxiety,
and may they maintain well-being in themselves,
May all beings be released from all suffering
and may they not be parted from
the good fortune they have attained.
When they act upon intention,
all beings are the owners of their action
and inherit its results.

THE W AY IT IS

Their future is born from such action,
companion to such action,
and its results will be their home.
All actions with intention,
be they skilful or harmful;
of such acts they will be the heirs.





THE WAY IT IS
AJAHN SUMEDHO
2024 © AMAR AVATI PUBLICATIONS
ISBN: 978-1-870205-11-5
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
COVER, BOOK DESIGN, ILLUSTR ATIONS AND FORMATTING:
NICHOLAS HALLIDAY .  HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM  
COVER LETTERING: JOHN SWAIN
ANY TR ANSLATION OF THIS TEXT
MUST BE DERIVED FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH.
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT, TR ANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN  
ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA PLEASE CONTACT AMAR AVATI PUBLICATIONS AT  
PUBLICATIONS@AMARAVATI.ORG
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE DIGITAL PDF DOWNLOAD AT FSBOOKS.ORG
 
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES
4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
THIS EDITION PRINTED IN THE UK, 2025

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit: creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
YOU ARE FREE TO
• Copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format.
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms. 
Under the following terms:
• ATTRIBUTION:  You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license
  and indicate if changes were made.
You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the 
licensor endorses you or your use.
• NON-COMMERCIAL: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• NO DERIVATIVES:  If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
 you may not distribute the modified material.
• NO ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS: You may not apply legal terms or 
 technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything
 the license permits.
NOTICES
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the public 
domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions 
necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as publicity, privacy, 
or moral rights may limit how you use the material.
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the
license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material
in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as
publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.



This collection of edited talks centres around 
meeting and resolving the conflict between how 
things are and how we want them to be. This 
simply-stated but profound release takes us into 
the heart of the Dhamma, the Buddha’s teachings.
Speaking from the depth of his personal expe -
rience, Ajahn Sumedho presents practices and
reflections that are accessible, penetrative and
illuminated with humourand compassion.
